9  ^1^'/' 


EXPERIMENTAL  RESEARCHES 

IN 

ELECTRICITY. 


VOL.  III. 


wm 


EXPERIMENTAL  RESEAECHES 


IN 


ELECTRICITY. 


BY 


MICHAEL  FARADAY,  D.C.L.  F.R.S. 

FULLERIAN  PROFESSOR  OF  CHEMISTRY  IN  THE  ROYAL  INSTITUTION. 
FOREIGN  ASSOCIATE  OF  THE  ACAD.  SCIENCES,  PARIS,  ORD.  BORUSS.  POUR  LE  MERITE 
BQ.,  MEMB.  ROYAL  AND  IMPERIAL  ACADD.  OF  SCIENCES,  PETERSBURGH, 
FLORENCE,  COPENHAGEN,  BERLIN,  GOTTINGEN,  MODENA, 
STOCKHOLM,  MUNICH,  BRUXELLES,  VIENNA, 
BOLOGNA,  ETC.  ETC. 


Reprinted  from  the  Philosophical  Transactions  of  1846—1852. 
"With  other  Electrical  Papers 
from  the  Proceedings  of  the  Royal  Institution  and  Philosophical  Magazine. 


VOL.  III. 


LONDON: 
RICHARD  TAYLOR  AND  WILLIAM  FRANCIS, 

PRINTERS  AND  PUBLISHERS  TO  THE  UNIVERSITY  OF  LONDON, 
RED  LION  COURT,  FLEET  STREET. 

1855. 


PREFACE. 


For  reasons  stated  in  the  First  Volume  of  these  Experi- 
mental Researches,  I  have  been  induced  to  gather  the 
remaining  Series  together,  and  to  add  to  them  certain 
other  papers  devoted  to  Electrical  and  Magnetic 
Research. 

To  the  prefatory  remarks  containing  these  reasons, 
I  would  recall  the  recollection  of  those  who  may  honour 
these  Researches  with  any  further  attention.  I  have 
printed  the  papers  in  this  Volume,  as  before,  with  little 
or  no  alteration,  except  that  I  have  placed  the  fair  and 
just  date  of  each  at  the  top  of  the  pages. 

As  regards  magnecrystailic  action,  which  commences 
at  Paragraph  2454,  the  reader  will  see  the  gradual 
change  and  enlargement  of  view  respecting  its  nature 
in  the  course  of  long  investigations  at  the  following 
places,  2550.  2562.  2576.  2584.  &c.,  2591.  2639.  2797. 
2818.  2836.  &c.  I  would  refer  readers  to  the  paper  by 
Tyndall  and  Knoblauch  in  the  Philosophical  Magazine, 
18.50,  vol.  xxxvii.  p.  1,  for  a  very  philosophical  account 
of  the  physical  cause  of  the  magnecrystailic  action*,  and 
to  the  paper  by  Professor  W.  Thomson  on  the  theory 

*  Marchand  and  Scheerer  say  that  bismuth  is  expanded  by  pressure  and 
has  its  structure  changed.    Gmelin's  Handbook,  iv.  p.  428. 


V 


PREFACE. 


of  magnetic  induction  in  crystalline  and  non-crystal- 
line substances  in  the  Philosophical  Magazine,  1851, 
vol.  i.  p.  177,  as  being  in  all  parts  in  perfect  accordance 
with  the  various  experimental  results  which  1  have  at 
different  times  obtained. 

With  respect  to  Paragraphs  2967.  3242,  and  the  in- 
tentions there  expressed  of  experimenting  with  oxygen 
at  low  temperatures,  I  have  endeavoured  to  carry  these 
intentions  out ;  but  the  extreme  difficulty  of  working  on 
such  attenuated  matter  as  gases  at  low  temperatures, 
without  the  production  of  air-currents  able  to  influence 
the  very  delicate  torsion-balanceand  apparatus  required  to 
measure  the  result,  is  so  great  as  to  have  prevented  me 
as  yet  from  obtaining  any  results  worthy  of  confidence. 

I  owe  many  thanks  to  the  Royal  Society  and  to 
the  Proprietors  of  the  Philosophical  Magazine,  for  the 
great  kindness  I  have  received  in  the  loan  of  plates,  &c., 
and  in  other  facilities  granted  to  me  for  the  printing  of 
the  volume. 

As  the  Index  belongs  both  to  the  Experimental 
Researches  and  to  the  other  papers,  its  references  are  of 
necessity  made  in  two  ways ;  those  to  the  Researches 
are,  as  before,  to  the  numbers  of  the  paragraphs,  and  are 
easily  recognized  by  the  greatness  of  the  numbers :  the 
other  references  are  to  the  pages,  and  being  always  pre- 
ceded by  p.  or  p]p.,  are  known  by  that  mark. 

MICHAEL  FARADAY. 


January,  1855. 


CONTENTS. 


Pai-. 

Series  XIX.     §  26.  On  the  magnetization  of  light  and  the  iUu- 

mination  of  magnetic  lines  of  force   ....  2146 

  ^  1.  Action  of  magnets  on  light    2146 

 ^  2.  Action  of  electric  currents  on  light  .  .  2189 

 ^  3.  General  considerations    2221 

Series  XX.      §  27.  On  new  magnetic  actions,  and  on  the  mag- 
netic condition  of  all  matter    2243 

 ^  1.  Apparatus  required    2245 

 ^  2.  Action  of  magnets  on  heavy  glass  ....  2253 

 ^  3.  Action  of  magnets  on  other  substances 

acting  magnetically  on  light   22  75 

 ^  4.  Action  of  magnets  on  metals  generally  2287 

 Revulsive  phsenomena    2309 

Series  XXI.    §  27.  (Continued.) 

 ^  5.  Action  of  magnets  on  the  magnetic 

metals  and  their  compounds    2343 

 ^  6.  Action  of  magnets  on  air  and  gases  . .  2400 

 ^7.  General  considerations    2417 

Series  XXII.  §  28.  On  the  crystalline  polarity  of  bismuth  (and 

other  bodies),  and  on  its  relation  to  the 

magnetic  form  of  force    2454 

 ^  1.  Crystalline  polarity  of  bismuth   2457 

 ^  2.  Crystalline  polarity  of  antimony  ....  2508 

 ^  3.  Crystalline  polarity  of  arsenic    2532 

 ^  4.  Crystalline  condition  of  various  bodies  .  2535 

 ^  5 .  Nature  of  the  magnecrystallic  force,  and 

general  observations   2550 

— —  ^  6.  On  the  position  of  a  crystal  of  sulphate 

of  iron  in  the  magnetic  field    2615 

Series  XXIII.  §  29.  On  the  polar  or  other  condition  of  dia- 

magnetic  bodies   2640 

Series  XXIV.  §  30.  On  the  possible  relation  of  gravity  to  elec- 
tricity   2702 

Series  XXV.    §  31.  On  the  magnetic  and  diamagnetic^condition 

of  bodies   2718 

 ^  1 .  Non-expansion  of  gaseous  bodies  by 

magnetic  force   2718 

 ^  2.  Differential  magnetic  action    2757 

 ^  3.  Magnetic  characters  of  oxygen,  nitro- 
gen, and  space   2770 


Vlll 


CONTENTS. 


Par. 

Series  XXVI.  §  32.  Magnetic  conducting  power    2797 

 ^  1.  Magnetic  conduction   2797 

 ^2.  Conduction  polarity    2818 

 ^3.  Magnecrystallic  conduction    ....  ....  2836 

§  33.  Atmospheric  magnetism   2847 

 ^  1.  General  principles   2847 

Series  XXVII.  §  33.  ^  2.  Experimental  inquiry  into  the  laws 

of  atmospheric  magnetic  action,  and 

their  application  to  particular  cases  2969 

Royal  Institution  Proceedings  (Report)  ....  p.  323 

Series  KXVIII.  §  34.  On  lines  of  magnetic  force;  their  definite  3070 

character ;  and  their  distribution  within 

a  magnet  and  through  space   3070 

Series  XXIX.  §  35.  On  the  em.ployment  of  the  induced  mag- 
neto-electric current  as  a  test  and  mea- 
sure of  magnetic  forces    3177 

 ^  1.  Galvanometer   3178 

 ^  2.  Revolving  rectangles  and  rings  ....  3192 

§  36.  On  the  amount  and  general  disposition  of 
the  forces  of  a  magnet  when  associated 

with  other  magnets   3215 

§  37.  Delineation  of  lines  of  magnetic  force  by 

iron  filings    3234 

On  (he  lines  of  magnetic  force  (R.  I.)  p.  402 

On  the  physical  character  of  the  lines  of  magnetic  force   3243 

Page 

On  the  physical  lines  of  magnetic  force  (R.  I.)    438 

On  the  magnetic  relations  and  characters  of  the  metals   444 

Thoughts  on  ray-vibrations   447 

On  the  magnetic  affection  of  light  (repeated  reflections)    453 

On  the  distinctions  between  the  ferro-magnetic  and  diamagnetic 

conditions  of  matter   457 

On  the  diamagnetic  conditions  of  flame  and  gases   467 

On  the  use  of  gutta  percha  in  electrical  insulation    494 

Observations  on  the  magnetic  force— law  of  distance  (R.  I.). .  . .  497 
On  electric  induction — associated  cases  of  current  and  static 

effects  (R.  I.)    508 

On  subterraneous  electro-telegraph  wires                               ..  521 

On  magnetic  hypotheses  (R.  I.)   524 

On  some  points  of  magnetic  philosophy   528 

The  same — and  on  the  nature  of  force  (R.  I.)   566 

Further  observations  on  associated  cases  of  current  and  static 

effects    575 


EXPERIMENTAL  RESEARCHES 

IN 

ELECTRICITY. 


NINETEENTH  SERIES 

§  26,  On  the  magnetization  of  light  and  the  illumination  of  mag- 
netic lines  of  force^.  ^  i.  Action  of  magnets  on  light.  ii. 
Action  of  electric  currents  on  light.  ^  hi.  General  considera- 
tions. 

Received  November  6, — Read  November  20,  1845. 
^  i.  Action  of  magnets  on  light. 

2146.  I  HAVE  long  held  an  opinion,  almost  amounting  to 
conviction,  in  common  I  believe  with  many  other  lovers  of 
natural  knowledge,  that  the  various  forms  under  which  the  forces 
of  matter  are  made  manifest  have  one  common  origin;  or,  in  other 
words,  are  so  directly  related  and  mutually  dependent,  that  they 
are  convertible,  as  it  were,  one  into  another,  and  possess  equi- 

'  Philosopliical  Transactions,  1846,  p.  1. 

^  The  title  of  this  paper  has,  I  understand,  led  many  to  a  misapprehension 
of  its  contents,  and  I  therefore  talce  the  liberty  of  appending  this  explanatory 
note.  Neither  accepting  nor  rejecting  the  hypothesis  of  an  iether,  or  the  cor- 
puscular, or  any  other  viev?  that  may  be  entertained  of  the  nature  of  light; 
and,  as  far  as  I  can  see,  nothing  being  really  known  of  a  ray  of  light  more 
than  of  a  line  of  magnetic  or  electric  force,  or  even  of  a  line  of  gravitating 
force,  except  as  it  and  they  are  manifest  in  and  by  substances ;  I  believe  that, 
in  the  experiments  I  describe  in  the  paper,  light  has  been  magnetically 
affected,  i.  e.  that  that  which  is  magnetic  in  the  forces  of  matter  has  been 
affected,  and  in  turn  has  affected  that  which  is  truly  magnetic  in  the  force  of 
light :  by  the  term  magnetic  I  include  here  either  of  the  peculiar  exertions  of 
the  power  of  a  magnet,  whether  it  be  that  which  is  manifest  in  the  magnetic 
or  the  diamagnetic  class  of  bodies.  The  phrase  "illumination  of  the  lines  oi 
VOL.  ITI.  H 


2  Action  of  magnets  on  light.      [Series  XIX. 

valents  of  power  in  their  action  ^  In  modern  times  the  proofs 
of  their  convertibihty  have  been  accumulated  to  a  very  consider- 
able extent,  and  a  commencement  made  of  the  determination  of 
their  equivalent  forces. 

2147.  This  strong  persuasion  extended  to  the  powers  of  light, 
and  led,  on  a  former  occasion,  to  many  exertions,  having  for 
their  object  the  discovery  of  the  direct  relation  of  light  and 
electricity,  and  their  mutual  action  in  bodies  subject  jointly  to 
their  power  ^;  but  the  results  vrere  negative  and  were  after- 
wards confirmed,  in  that  respect,  by  Wartmann^. 

2148.  These  ineffectual  exertions,  and  many  others  which 
were  never  published,  could  not  remove  my  strong  persuasion 
derived  from  philosophical  considerations;  and,  therefore,  I 
recently  resumed  the  inquiry  by  experiment  in  a  most  strict  and 
searching  manner,  and  have  at  last  succeeded  in  magnetizing  and 
electrifying  a  ray  of  light,  and  in  illuminating  a  magnetic  line  of 
force.  These  results,  without  entering  into  the  detail  of  many 
unproductive  experiments,  I  will  describe  as  briefly  and  clearly 
as  I  can. 

2149.  But  before  I  proceed  to  them,  I  will  define  the  mean- 
ing I  connect  with  certain  terms  which  I  shall  have  occasion  to 
use: — thus,  by  line  of  magnetic  force,  or  magnetic  line  of  force, 
or  magnetic  curve,  I  mean  that  exercise  of  magnetic  force  which 
is  exerted  in  the  lines  usually  called  magnetic  curves,  and  which 
equally  exist  as  passing  from  or  to  magnetic  poles,  or  forming 
concentric  circles  round  an  electric  current.  By  line  of  electric 
force,  I  mean  the  force  exerted  in  the  lines  joining  two  bodies, 
acting  on  each  other  according  to  the  principles  of  static  electric 
induction  (1161,  &c.),  which  may  also  be  either  in  curved  or 

magnetic  force"  has  been  understood  to  imply  that  I  had  rendered  them 
luminous.  This  was  not  within  my  thought.  I  intended  to  express  that  the 
line  of  magnetic  force  was  illuminated  as  the  earth  is  illuminated  by  the  sun, 
or  the  spider's  web  illuminated  by  the  astronomer's  lamp.  Employing  a  ray 
of  light,  we  can  tell,  hy  the  eye,  the  direction  of  the  magnetic  lines  through  a 
body ;  and  by  the  alteration  of  the  ray  and  its  optical  effect  on  the  eye,  can 
see  the  course  of  the  lines  just  as  we  can  see  the  course  of  a  thread  of  glass, 
or  any  other  transparent  substance,  rendered  visible  by  the  light :  and  this  is 
what  I  meant  by  illumination,  as  the  paper  fully  explains.— December  15, 
1845.    M.  F. 

1  Experimental  Researches,  57,  366,  376,  877,  961,  2071. 

Philosophical  Transactions,  1834.    Experimental  Researches,  951-955. 
'  Archives  de  I'Electricite,  ii.  pp.  596-600. 


Nv.  IS45.]      Rotation  of  a  ray  hij  magnetism.  3 

straight  lines.  By  a  diamagnetic,  I  mean  a  body  through  which 
Ines  of  magnetic  force  are  passing,  and  which  does  not  by  their 
action  assume  the  usual  magnetic  state  of  iron  or  loadstone. 

2150.  A  ray  of  light  issuing  from  an  Argand  lamp,  was 
polarized  in  a  horizontal  plane  by  reflexion  from  a  sm-face  of 
glass,  and  the  polarized  ray  passed  through  a  Nichol's  eye-piece 
revolving  on  a  horizontal  axis,  so  as  to  be  easily  examined  by 
the  latter.  Between  the  polarizing  mirror  and  the  eye-piece 
two  powerful  electro-magnetic  poles  were  arranged,  being  either 
the  poles  of  a  horse-shoe  magnet,  or  the  contrary  poles  of  two 
cylinder  magnets ;  they  were  separated  from  each  other  about 
2  inches  in  the  direction  of  the  hne  of  the  ray,  and  so  placed, 
that,  if  on  the  same  side  of  the  polarized  ray,  it  might  pass  near 
them ;  or  if  on  contrary  sides,  it  might  go  between  them,  its 
direction  being  always  parallel,  or  nearly  so,  to  the  magnetic 
lines  of  force  (2149.).  After  that,  any  transparent  substance 
placed  between  the  two  poles,  would  have  passing  through  it, 
both  the  polarized  ray  and  the  magnetic  lines  of  force  at  the 
same  time  and  in  the  same  direction. 

2151.  Sixteen  years  ago  I  published  certain  experiments 
made  upon  optical  glass  ^,  and  described  the  formation  and 
general  characters  of  one  variety  of  heavy  glass,  which,  from  its 
materials,  was  called  silicated  borate  of  lead.  It  was  this  glass 
which  first  gave  me  the  discovery  of  the  relation  between  light 
and  magnetism,  and  it  has  power  to  illustrate  it  in  a  degree 
beyond  that  of  any  other  body;  for  the  sake  of  perspicuity  I 
will  first  describe  the  phaenomena  as  presented  by  this  substance. 

2152.  A  piece  of  this  glass,  about  2  inches  square  and  0*5 
of  an  inch  thick,  having  flat  and  polished  edges,  was  placed  as 
a  diamagnetic  (2149.)  between  the  poles  (not  as  yet  magnetized 
by  the  electric  current),  so  that  the  polarized  ray  should  pass 
through  its  length ;  the  glass  acted  as  air,  water,  or  any  other 
indifferent  substance  would  do ;  and  if  the  eye-piece  were  pre- 

'  Philosophical  Transactions,  1830,  p.  1.  I  cannot  resist  the  occasion 
■which  is  thus  offered  to  me  of  mentioning  the  name  of  Mr.  Anderson,  who 
came  to  me  as  an  assistant  in  the  glass  experiments,  and  has  remained  ever 
since  in  the  Laboratory  of  tiie  Royal  Institution.  He  has  assisted  me  in  all 
the  researches  into  which  I  have  entered  since  that  time,  and  to  his  care, 
steadiness,  exactitude,  and  faithfulness  in  the  performamce  of  all  that  has  been 
committed  to  his  charge,  I  am  much  indebted. — M.  F. 

B  2 


4 


Action  of  magnets  on  light.      [Series  XIX. 


viously  turned  into  such  a  position  that  the  polarized  ray  was 
extinguished,  or  rather  the  image  produced  by  it  rendered  in- 
visible, then  the  introduction  of  this  glass  made  no  alteration  in 
that  respect.  In  this  state  of  circumstances  the  force  of  the 
electro-magnet  was  developed,  by  sending  an  electric  current 
through  its  coils,  and  immediately  the  image  of  the  lamp-flame 
became  visible,  and  continued  so  as  long  as  the  arrangement 
continued  magnetic.  On  stopping  the  electric  current,  and  so 
causing  the  magnetic  force  to  cease,  the  light  instantly  disap- 
peared; these  phaenomena  could  be  renewed  at  pleasure,  at  any 
instant  of  time,  and  upon  any  occasion,  showing  a  perfect 
dependence  of  cause  and  effect. 

2153.  The  voltaic  current  which  I  used  upon  this  occasion, 
was  that  of  five  pair  of  Grove's  construction,  and  the  electro- 
magnets were  of  such  power  that  the  poles  would  singly  sustain 
a  weight  of  from  twenty-eight  to  fifty-six,  or  more,  pounds.  A 
person  looking  for  the  phsenomenon  for  the  first  time  would  not 
be  able  to  see  it  with  a  weak  magnet. 

2154.  The  character  of  the  force  thus  impressed  upon  the 
diamagnetic  is  that  of  rotation;  for  when  the  image  of  the  lamp- 
flame  has  thus  been  rendered  visible,  revolution  of  the  eye-piece 
to  the  right  or  left,  more  or  less,  will  cause  its  extinction ;  and 
the  further  motion  of  the  eye-piece  to  the  one  side  or  other  of 
this  position  will  produce  the  reappearance  of  the  hght,  and 
that  with  complementary  tints,  according  as  this  further  motion 
is  to  the  right-  or  left-hand. 

2155.  When  the  pole  nearest  to  the  observer  was  a  marked 
pole,  i.  e.  the  same  as  the  north  end  of  a  magnetic  needle,  and 
the  further  pole  was  unmarked,  the  rotation  of  the  ray  was 
right-handed;  for  the  eye-piece  had  to  be  turned  to  the  right-hand, 
or  clock  fashion,  to  overtake  the  ray  and  restore  the  image  to  its 
first  condition.  When  the  poles  were  reversed,  which  was  in- 
stantly done  by  changing  the  direction  of  the  electric  current, 
the  rotation  was  changed  also  and  became  left-handed,  the  altera- 
tion being  to  an  equal  degree  in  extent  as  before.  The  direction 
was  always  the  same  for  the  same  line  of  magnetic  force  (2149.). 

2156.  When  the  diamagnetic  was  placed  in  the  numerous 
other  positions,  which  can  easily  be  conceived,  about  the  mag- 
netic poles,  results  were  obtained  more  or  less  marked  in  extent, 
and  very  definite  in  character,  but  of  which  the  phasnomena 


Nov.  1845.]      Rotation  of  a  ray  by  magnetism.  5 

just  described  may  be  considered  as  the  chief  example :  they 
will  be  referred  to,  as  far  as  is  necessary,  hereafter. 

2157.  The  same  phasnomena  were  produced  in  the  silicated  . 
borate  of  lead  (2151.)  by  the  action  of  a  good  ordinary  steel!] 
horse-shoe  magnet,  no  electric  current  being  now  used.  ^  The  1 
results  were  feeble,  but  still  sufficient  to  show  the  perfect  iden-  | 
tity  of  action  between  electro-magnets  and  common  magnets  in 
this  their  power  over  light. 

2158.  Two  magnetic  poles  were  employed  end-ways,  i.  e.  the 
cores  of  the  electro-magnets  were  hollow  iron  cylinders,  and  the 
ray  of  polarized  Hght  passed  along  their  axes  and  through  the 
diamagnetic  placed  between  them:  the  effect  was  the  same. 

2159.  One  magnetic  pole  only  was  used,  that  being  one  end 
of  a  powerful  cylinder  electro-magnet.  When  the  heavy  glass 
was  beyond  the  magnet,  being  close  to  it  but  between  the  mag- 
net and  the  polarizing  reflector,  the  rotation  Avas  in  one  direc- 
tion, dependent  on  the  nature  of  the  pole ;  when  the  diamag- 
netic was  on  the  near  side,  being  close  to  it  but  between  it 
and  the  eye,  the  rotation  for  the  same  pole  was  in  the  contrary 
direction  to  what  it  was  before ;  and  when  the  magnetic  pole 
was  changed,  both  these  directions  were  changed  with  it.  When 
the  heavy  glass  was  placed  in  a  corresponding  position  to  the 
pole,  but  above  or  below  it,  so  that  the  magnetic  curves  were  no 
longer  passing  through  the  glass  parallel  to  the  ray  of  polarized 
light,  but  rather  perpendicular  to  it,  then  no  effect  was  pro- 
duced. These  particularities  may  be  understood  by  reference  to 
fig.  1,  where  a  and  b  represent  the 

first  positions  of  the  diamagnetic,  and 
c  and  d  the  latter  positions,  the  course 
of  the  ray  being  marked  by  the  dot-   


ft 


ted  line.    If  also  the  glass  were  placed  ^;?{p. 

directly  at  the  end  of  the  magnet,   

then  no  effect  was  produced  on  a  ray  ^^^^ 
passing  in  the  direction  here  described,  ^ 
though  it  is  evident,  from  what  has 
been  already  said  (2155.),  that  a  ray  passing  parallel  to  the 
magnetic  lines  through  the  glass  so  placed,  would  have  been 
affected  by  it. 

2160.  Magnetic  lines,  then,  in  passing  through  sihcatcd 
borate  of  lead,  and  a  great  number  of  other  substances  (2173.), 


6 


Action  of  magnets  on  light.      [Series  XIX. 


cause  these  bodies  to  act  upon  a  polarized  ray  of  light  when  the 
lines  are  parallel  to  the  ray,  or  in  proportion  as  they  are  parallel 
to  it :  if  they  are  perpendicular  to  the  ray,  they  have  no  action 
upon  it.  They  give  the  diamagnetic  the  power  of  rotating  the 
ray ;  and  the  law  of  this  action  on  light  is,  that  if  a  magnetic 
line  of  force  be  going  from  a  north  pole,  or  coming  from  a  south 
pole,  along  the  path  of  a  polarized  ray  coming  to  the  observer, 
it  wiW  rotate  that  ray  to  the  right-hand ;  or,  that  if  such  a  line 
of  force  be  coming  from  a  north  pole,  or  going  from  a  south 
pole,  it  will  rotate  such  a  ray  to  the  left-hand. 

2161.  If  a  cork  or  a  cylinder  of  glass,  representing  the  dia- 
magnetic, be  marked  at  its  ends  with  the  letters 
N  and  S,  to  represent  the  poles  of  a  magnet, 
the  line  joining  these  letters  may  be  considered 
as  a  magnetic  line  of  force ;  and  further,  if  a 
line  be  traced  round  the  cylinder  with  arrow 
heads  on  it  to  represent  direction,  as  in  the 
figure,  such  a  simple  model,  held  up  before  the 
eye,  will  express  the  whole  of  the  law,  and  give  every  position 
and  consequence  of  direction  resulting  from  it.  If  a  watch  be 
considered  as  the  diamagnetic,  the  north  pole  of  a  magnet  being 
imagined  against  the  face,  and  a  south  pole  against  the  back, 
then  the  motion  of  the  hand  will  indicate  the  direction  of  rota- 
tion which  a  ray  of  light  undergoes  by  magnetization. 

2162.  1  will  now  proceed  to  the  different  circumstances  which 
affect,  limit,  and  define  the  extent  and  nature  of  this  new  power 
of  action  on  light. 

2163.  In  the  first  place,  the  rotation  appears  to  be  in  propor- 
tion to  the  extent  of  the  diamagnetic  through  which  the  ray  and 
the  magnetic  lines  pass.  I  preserved  the  strength  of  the  mag- 
net and  the  interval  between  its  poles  constant,  and  then  inter- 
posed different  pieces  of  the  same  heavy  glass  (2i51.)  between 
the  poles.  The  greater  the  extent  of  the  diamagnetic  in  the 
line  of  the  ray,  whether  in  one,  two,  or  three  pieces,  the  greater 
was  the  rotation  of  the  ray;  and,  as  far  as  I  could  judge  by  these 
first  experiments,  the  amount  of  rotation  was  exactly  propor- 
tionate to  the  extent  of  diamagnetic  through  which  the  ray 
passed.  No  addition  or  diminution  of  the  heavy  glass  on  the 
side  of  the  course  of  the  ray  made  any  difference  in  the  effect  of 
that  part  through  which  the  ray  passed. 


Nov.  1845.]      Rotation  of  a  ray  by  magneiisin. 


1 


2164.  The  power  of  rotating  the  ray  of  light  increased  with 
the  intensity  of  the  magnetic  lines  of  force.  This  general  effect 
is  very  easily  ascertained  by  the  use  of  electro-magnets;  and 
within  such  range  of  power  as  I  have  employed,  it  appears  to 
be  directly  proportionate  to  the  intensity  of  the  magnetic  force. 

2165.  Other  bodies,  besides  the  heavy  glass,  possess  the 
same  power  of  becoming,  under  the  influence  of  magnetic  force, 
active  on  light  (2173.).  When  these  bodies  possess  a  rotative 
power  of  their  own,  as  is  the  case  with  oil  of  turpentine,  sugar, 
tai-taric  acid,  tartrates,  &c.,  the  effect  of  the  magnetic  force  is  to 
add  to,  or  subtract  from,  their  specific  force,  according  as  the 
natural  rotation  and  that  induced  by  the  magnetism  is  right-  or 
left-handed  (2231.). 

2166.  I  could  not  perceive  that  this  power  was  affected  by 
any  degree  of  motion  which  I  was  able  to  communicate  to  the 
diamagnetic,  whilst  jointly  subject  to  the  action  of  the  mag- 
netism and  the  light. 

2167.  The  interposition  of  copper,  lead,  tin,  silver,  and  other 
ordinary  non-magnetic  bodies  in  the  course  of  the  magnetic 
curves,  either  between  the  pole  and  the  diamagnetic,  or  in  other 
positions,  produced  no  effect  either  in  kind  or  degree  upon  the 
phaenomena. 

2168.  Iron  frequently  affected  the  results  in  a  very  consider- 
able degree;  but  it  always  appeared  to  be,  either  by  altering  the 
direction  of  the  magnetic  lines,  or  disposing  within  itself  of  tlieir 
force.  Thus  when  the  two  conti^ary  poles  were  on  one  side 
of  the  polarized  ray  (2150.),  and  the  heavy  glass  in  its  best 
position  between  them  and  in  the  ray  (2152.),  the  bringing  of  a 
large  piece  of  iron  near  to  the  glass  on  the  other  side  of  the  ray, 
caused  the  power  of  the  diamagnetic  to  fall.  This  was  because 
certain  lines  of  magnetic  force,  which  at  first  passed  through  the 
glass  parallel  to  the  ray,  now  crossed  the  glass  and  the  ray;  the 
iron  giving  two  contrary  poles  op])osite  the  poles  of  the  magnet, 
and  thus  determining  a  new  course  for  a  certain  portion  of  the 
magnetic  power,  and  that  across  the  polarized  ray. 

2169.  Or,  if  the  iron,  instead  of  being  applied  on  the  opposite 
side  of  the  glass,  were  applied  on  the  same  side  with  the  mag- 
net, either  near  it  or  in  contact  with  it,  then,  again,  the  power 
of  the  diamagnetic  fell,  simply  because  the  power  of  the  magnet 
was  diverted  from  it  into  a  new  direction.   These  effects  depend 


8  Action  of  magnets  on  liylit.      [Series  XIX. 

much  of  course  on  the  intensity  and  power  of  the  magnet,  and 
on  the  size  and  softness  of  the  iron. 

2170.  The  electro-hehces  (2190.)  without  the  iron  cores  were 
very  feeble  in  power,  and  indeed  hardly  sensible  in  their  effect. 
With  the  iron  cores  they  were  powerful,  though  no  more  elec- 
tricity was  then  passing  through  the  coils  than  before  (IO71.). 
This' shows,  in  a  very  simple  manner,  that  the  phsenomena  ex- 
hibited by  light  under  these  circumstances,  is  directly  connected 
with  the  rnagnetic  form  of  force  supplied  by  the  arrangement. 
Another  effect  whi'ch  occurred  illustrated  the  same  point.  When 
the  contact  at  the  voltaic  battery  is  made,  and  the  current  sent 
round  the  electro-magnet,  the  image  produced  by  the  rotation 
of  the  polarized  ray  does  not  rise  up  to  its  full  lustre  imme- 
diately, but  increases  for  a  couple  of  seconds,  gradually  acquiring 
its  greatest  intensity  ;  on  breaking  the  contact,  it  sinks  instantly 
and  disappears  apparently  at  once.  The  gradual  rise  in  bright- 
ness is  due  to  the  time  which  the  iron  core  of  the  magnet  re- 
quires  to  evolve  all  that  magnetic  power  which  the  electric  cur- 
rent can  develope  in  it;  and  as  the  magnetism  rises  in  intensity, 
so  does  its  effect  on  the  light  increase  in  power ;  hence  the  pro- 
gressive condition  of  the  rotation. 

2171.  I  cannot  as  yet  find  that  the  heavy  glass  (2151.),  when 
in  this  state,  i.  e.  with  magnetic  lines  of  force  passing  through 
it,  exhibits  any  increased  degree,  or  has  any  specific  magneto- 
inductive  action  of  the  recognized  kind.  I  have  placed  it  in 
large  quantities,  and  in  different  positions,  between  magnets  and 
magnetic  needles,  having  at  the  time  very  delicate  means  of  ap- 
preciating any  difference  between  it  and  air,  but  could  find  none. 

2172.  Using  water,  alcohol,  mercury,  and  other  fluids  con- 
tained in  very  large  delicate  thermometer-shaped  vessels,  I  could 
not  discover  that  any  difference  in  volume  occurred  when  the 
magnetic  curves  passed  through  them. 

2173.  It  is  time  that  I  should  pass  to  a  consideration  of  this 
power  of  magnetism  over  light  as  exercised,  not  only  in  the  sili- 
cated  borate  of  lead  (:il51.),  but  in  many  other  substances;  and 
here  we  perceive,  in  the  first  place,  that  if  all  transparent  bodies 
possess  the  power  of  exhibiting  the  action,  they  have  it  in  very 
different  degrees,  and  that  up  to  this  time  there  are  some  that 
have  not  shown  it  at  all. 


Nov.  1845.]      Rotation  of  a  rcnj  hj  magnetism. 


9 


2174.  Next,  we  may  observe,  that  bodies  that  are  exceedingly 
different  to  each  other  in  chemical,  physical,  and  mechanical 
properties,  develope  this  effect;  for  solids  and  liquids,  acids, 
alkalies,  oils,  water,  alcohol,  asther,  all  possess  the  power. 

2175.  And  lastly,  we  may  observe,  that  in  all  of  them,  though 
the  degree  of  action  may  differ,  still  it  is  always  the  same  in 
kind,  being  a  rotative  power  over  the  ray  of  light ;  and  further, 
the  direction  of  the  rotation  is,  in  every  case,  independent  of  the 
nature  or  state  of  the  substance,  and  dependent  upon  the  direc- 
tion of  the  magnetic  line  of  force,  according  to  the  law  before 
laid  down  (2160.). 

2176.  Amongst  the  substances  in  which  this  power  of  action 
is  found,  I  have  already  distinguished  the  silico-borate  of  lead 
(2151.)  as  eminently  fitted  for  the  purpose  of  exhibiting  the  phas- 
nomena.  I  regret  that  it  should  be  the  best,  since  it  is  not 
likely  to  be  in  the  possession  of  many,  and  few  wdll  be  induced 
to  take  the  trouble  of  preparing  it.  If  made,  it  should  be  well 
annealed,  for  otherwise  the  pieces  will  have  considerable  power 
of  depolarizing  hght,  and  then  the  particular  phaenomena  under 
consideration  are  much  less  stinkingly  observed.  The  borate  of 
lead,  however,  is  a  substance  much  more  fusible,  softening  at 
the  heat  of  boiling  oil,  and  therefore  far  more  easily  prepared  in 
the  form  of  glass  plates  and  annealed;  and  it  possesses  as  much 
magneto- rotative  power  over  light  as  the  silico-borate  itself. 
Flint-glass  exhibits  the  property,  but  in  a  less  degree  than  the 
substances  above.  Crown-glass  show's  it,  but  in  a  still  smaller 
degree. 

2177.  Whilst  employing  crystalline  bodies  as  diamagnetics,  I 
generally  gave  them  that  position  in  w-hich  they  did  not  affect 
the  polarized  ray,  and  then  induced  the  magnetic  curves  through 
them.  As  a  class,  they  seemed  to  resist  the  assumption  of  the 
rotating  state.  Rock-salt  and  fluor-spar  gave  evidence  of  the 
power  in  a  slight  degree  j  and  I  think  that  a  crystal  of  alum 
did  the  same,  but  its  ray  length  in  the  transparent  part  was  so 
small  that  I  could  not  ascertain  the  fact  decisively.  Tw'o  spe- 
cimens of  transparent  fluor,  lent  me  by  Mr.  Tennant,  gave  the 
effect. 

2178.  Rock-crystal,  4  inches  across,  gave  no  indications  of 
action  on  the  ray,  neither  did  smaller  crystals,  nor  cubes  about 
three-fourths  of  an  inch  in  the  side,  which  were  so  cut  as  to 


10 


Action  of  magnets  on  light.      [Series  XIX. 


have  two  of  their  faces  perpendicular  to  the  axis  of  the  crystal 
(1692,  1693.),  though  they  were  examined  in  every  direction. 

2179.  Iceland  spar  exhibited  no  signs  of  effect,  either  in  the 
form  of  rhomboids,  or  of  cubes  like  those  just  described  (1695.). 

2180.  Sulphate  of  baryta,  sulphate  of  lime,  and  carbonate  of 
soda,  were  also  without  action  on  the  light. 

2181.  A  piece  of  fine  clear  ice  gave  me  no  effect.  I  cannot 
however  say  there  is  none,  for  the  effect  of  water  in  the  same 
mass  would  be  very  small,  and  the  irregularity  of  the  flattened 
surface  from  the  fusion  of  the  ice  and  flow  of  water,  made  the 
observation  very  difficult. 

2182.  With  some  degree  of  curiosity  and  hope,  I  put  gold- 
leaf  into  the  magnetic  lines,  but  could  perceive  no  effect.  Con- 
sidering the  extremely  small  dimensions  of  the  length  of  the 
path  of  the  polarized  ray  in  it,  any  positive  result  was  hardly  to 
be  expected. 

2183.  In  experiments  with  liquids,  a  very  good  method  of 
observing  the  effect,  is  to  enclose  them  in  bottles  from  1^  to  3 
or  4  inches  in  diameter,  placing  these  in  succession  between  the 
magnetic  poles  (2150.),  and  bringing  the  analysing  eye-piece  so 
near  to  the  bottle,  that,  by  adjustment  of  the  latter,  its  cylindri- 
cal form  may  cause  a  diffuse  but  useful  image  of  the  lamp-flame 
to  be  seen  through  it :  the  light  of  this  image  is  easily  distin- 
guished from  that  which  passes  by  irregular  refraction  through 
the  strise  and  deformations  of  the  glass,  and  the  pheenomena 
being  looked  for  in  this  light  are  easily  seen. 

2184.  Water,  alcohol,  and  aether,  all  show  the  effect;  water 
most,  alcohol  less,  and  aether  the  least.  All  the  fixed  oils  which 
I  have  tried,  including  almond,  castor,  ohve,  poppy,  hnseed, 
sperm,  elaine  from  hog's  lard,  and  distilled  resin  oil,  produce  it. 
The  essential  oils  of  turpentine,  bitter  almonds,  spike  lavender, 
lavender,  jessamine,  cloves,  and  laurel,  produce  it.  Also  naph- 
tha of  various  kinds,  melted  spermaceti,  fused  sulphur,  chloride 
of  sulphur,  chloride  of  arsenic,  and  every  other  liquid  substance 
which  I  had  at  hand  and  could  submit  in  sufficient  bulk  to  ex- 
periment. 

2185.  Of  aqueous  solutions  I  tried  150  or  more,  including  the 
soluble  acids,  alkalies  and  salts,  with  sugar,  gum,  &c.,  the  list  of 
w  hich  would  be  too  long  to  give  here,  since  the  great  conclusion 
was,  that  the  exceeding  diversity  of  substance  caused  no  ex- 


Nov.  1845.]      Rotation  of  a  ray  by  magnetism.  11 

ception  to  the  general  result,  for  air  the  bodies  showed  the  pro- 
perty. It  is  indeed  more  than  probable,  that  in  all  these  cases 
the  water  and  not  the  other  substance  present  was  the  ruling 
matter.  The  same  general  result  was  obtained  with  alcoholic 
solutions. 

2186.  Proceeding  from  liquids  to  air  and  gaseous  bodies,  I 
have  here  to  state  that,  as  yet,  1  have  not  been  able  to  detect 
the  exercise  of  this  power  in  any  one  of  the  substances  in  this 
class.  I  have  tried  the  experiment  with  bottles  4  inches  in  dia- 
meter, and  the  following  gases:  oxygen,  nitrogen,  hydrogen, 
nitrous  oxide,  defiant  gas,  sulphurous  acid,  muriatic  acid,  car- 
bonic acid,  carbonic  oxide,  ammonia,  sulphuretted  hydrogen, 
and  bromine  vapour,  at  ordinary  temperatures;  but  they  all 
gave  negative  results.  With  air,  the  trial  has  been  carried,  by 
another  form  of  apparatus,  to  a  much  higher  degree,  but  still 
ineffectually  (2212.). 

2187.  Before  dismissing  the  consideration  of  the  substances 
which  exhibited  this  power,  and  in  reference  to  those  in  which 
it  was  superinduced  upon  bodies  possessing,  naturally,  rotative 
force  (2165.  2231.),  I  may  record,  that  the  following  are  the 
substances  submitted  to  experiment :  castor  oil,  resin  oil,  oil  of 
spike  lavender,  of  laurel,  Canada  balsam,  alcoholic  solution  of 
camphor,  alcoholic  solution  of  camphor  and  corrosive  sublimate, 
aqueous  solutions  of  sugar,  tartaric  acid,  tartrate  of  soda,  tar- 
trate of  potassa  and  antimony,  tartaric  and  boracic  acid,  and 
sulphate  of  nickel,  which  rotated  to  the  right-hand;  copaiba 
balsam,  which  rotated  the  ray  to  the  left-hand ;  and  two  speci- 
mens of  camphine  or  oil  of  turpentine,  in  one  of  which  the  ro- 
tation was  to  the  right-hand,  and  in  the  other  to  the  left.  In 
all  these  cases,  as  already  said  (2165.),  the  superinduced  mag- 
netic rotation  was  according  to  the  general  law  (2160.),  and  with- 
out reference  to  the  previous  power  of  the  body. 

2188.  Camphor  being  melted  in  a  tube  about  an  inch  in  dia- 
meter, exhibited  high  natural  rotative  force,  but  I  could  not 
discover  that  the  magnetic  curves  induced  additional  force  in  it. 
It  may  be,  however,  that  the  shortness  of  the  ray  length  and 
the  quantity  of  coloured  light  left,  even  when  the  eye-piece  was 
adjusted  to  the  most  favourable  position  for  darkenino-  the 
image  produced  by  the  naturally  rotated  ray,  rendered  the 
small  magneto-power  of  the  camphor  insensible. 


12 


Action  of  electric  currents  on  light.  [Series  XIX. 


^  ii.  Action  of  electric  currents  on  light. 

2189.  From  a  consideration  of  the  nature  and  jjosition  of  the 
hnes  of  magnetic  and  electric  force,  and  the  relation  of  a  mag- 
net to  a  current  of  electricity,  it  appeared  almost  certain  that  an 
electric  current  would  give  the  same  result  of  action  on  light  as 
a  magnet;  and,  in  the  helix,  would  supply  a  form  of  apparatus 
in  M'hich  great  lengths  of  diamagnetics,  and  especially  of  such 
bodies  as  appeared  to  be  but  little  affected  between  the  poles  of 
the  magnet,  might  be  submitted  to  examination  and  their  effect 
exalted  :  this  expectation  was,  by  experiment,  realized. 

2190.  Hehces  of  copper  wire  were  employed,  three  of  which 
I  will  refer  to.  The  first,  or  long  helix,  was  0-4  of  an  inch  in- 
ternal diameter ;  the  wire  was  0-03  of  an  inch  in  diameter,  and 
having  gone  round  the  axis  from  one  end  of  the  helix  to  the 
other,  then  returned  in  the  same  manner,  forming  a  coil  65 
inches  long,  double  in  its  whole  extent,  and  containing  1240  feet 
of  wire. 

2191.  The  second,  or  medium  helix,  is  19  inches  long,  1-87 
inch  internal  diameter,  and  3  inches  external  diameter.  The 
wire  is  0-2  of  an  inch  in  diameter,  and  80  feet  in  length,  being 
disposed  in  the  coil  as  two  concentric  spirals.  The  electric  cur- 
rent, in  passing  through  it,  is  not  divided,  but  traverses  the 
whole  length  of  the  wire. 

2192.  The  third,  or  Woolwich  helix,  was  made  under  my  in- 
struction for  the  use  of  Lieut.-Colonel  Sabine's  establishment 
at  Woolwich.  It  is  26-5  inches  long,  2-5  inches  internal  dia- 
meter, and  4-75  inches  external  diameter.  The  wire  is  0-17  of 
an  inch  in  diameter,  and  501  feet  in  length.  It  is  disposed  in  the 
coil  in  four  concentric  spirals  connected  end  to  end,  so  that  the 
whole  of  the  electric  current  employed  passes  through  all  the  wire. 

2193.  The  long  hehx  (2190.)  acted  very  feebly  on  a  mag- 
netic needle  placed  at  a  little  distance  from  it;  the  medium  helix 
(2191.)  acted  more  powerfully,  and  the  Woolwich  hehx  (2192.) 
very  strongly ;  the  same  battery  of  ten  pairs  of  Grove's  plate 
being  employed  in  all  cases. 

2194.  SoHd  bodies  were  easily  subjected  to  the  action  of  these 
electro-helices,  being  for  that  purpose  merely  cut  into  the  form 
of  bars  or  prisms  with  flat  and  polished  ends,  and  then  intro- 


Nov.  1845.]      Rotation  of  a  ray  by  electricity.  13 

duced  as  cores  into  the  helices.  For  the  purpose  of  submitting 
Hquid  bodies  to  the  same  action,  tubes  of  glass  were  provided, 
furnished  at  the  ends  with  caps;  the  cylindrical  part  of  the  cap 
was  brass,  and  had  a  tubular  aperture  for  the  introduction  of 
the  liquids,  but  the  end  was  a  flat  glass  plate.  When  the  tube 
was  intended  to  contain  aqueous  fluids,  the  plates  were  attached 
to  the  caps,  and  the  caps  to  the  tube  by  Canada  balsam ;  when 
the  tube  had  to  contain  alcohol,  sether  or  essential  oils,  a  thick 
mixture  of  powdered  gum  with  a  little  water  was  employed  as 
the  cement. 

2195.  The  general  effect  produced  by  this  form  of  apparatus 
may  be  stated  as  follows:— The  tube  within  the  long  hehx 
(2190.)  was  filled  with  distilled  water  and  placed  in  the  line  of 
the  polarized  ray,  so  that  by  examination  through  the  eye-piece 
(2150.),  the  image  of  the  lamp-flame  produced  by  the  ray  could 
be  seen  through  it.    Then  the  eye-piece  was  turned  until  the 
image  of  the  flame  disappeared,  and,  afterwards,  the  current  of 
ten  pairs  of  plates  sent  through  the  helix ;  instantly  the  image 
of  the  flame  reappeared,  and  continued  as  long  as  the  electric 
current  was  passing  through  the  hehx;  on  stopping  the  current 
the  image  disappeared.    The  hght  did  not  rise  up  gradua%, 
as  in  the  case  of  electro-magnets  (21  70.),  but  instantly.  These 
results  could  be  produced  at  pleasure.    In  this  experiment  we 
may,  I  think,  justly  say  that  a  ray  of  light  is  electrified  and  the 
electric  forces  illuminated. 

2196.  The  phsenomena  may  be  made  more  striking,  by  the 
adjustment  of  a  lens  of  long  focus  between  the  tube  and  the 
polarizing  mirror,  or  one  of  short  focus  between  the  tube  and 
the  eye;  and  where  the  helix,  or  the  battery,  or  the  substance 
experimented  with,  is  feeble  in  power,  such  means  ofier  assist- 
ance in  working  out  the  effects :  but  after  a  little  experience, 
they  are  easily  dispensed  with,  and  are  only  useful  as  accessories 
in  doubtful  cases. 

2197.  In  cases  where  the  effect  is  feeble,  it  is  more  easily 
perceived  if  the  Nichol  eye-piece  be  adjusted,  not  to  the  perfect 
extinction  of  the  ray,  but  a  little  short  of  or  beyond  that  position ; 
so  that  the  image  of  the  flame  may  be  but  just  visible.  Then, 
on  the  exertion  of  the  power  of  the  electric  current,  the  light  is 
either  increased  in  intensity,  or  else  diminished,  or  extinguished, 
or  even  re-illuminated  on  the  other  side  of  the  dark  condition ; 


14 


Action  of  electric  currents  on  light.  [Series  XIX. 


and  this  change  is  more  easily  perceived  than  if  the  eye  began 
to  observe  from  a  state  of  utter  darkness.  Such  a  mode  of  ob- 
serving also  assists  in  demonstrating  the  rotatory  character  of 
the  action  on  hght ;  for,  if  the  light  be  made  visible  beforehand 
by  the  motion  of  the  eye-piece  in  one  direction,  and  the  power 
of  the  current  be  to  increase  that  hght,  an  instant  only  suffices, 
after  stopping  the  current,  to  move  the  eye-piece  in  the  other 
direction  until  the  light  is  apparent  as  at  first,  and  then  the 
power  of  the  current  will  be  to  diminish  it;  the  tints  of  the  lights 
being  affected  also  at  the  same  time. 

2198.  When  the  current  was  sent  round  the  helix  in  one  di- 
rection, the  rotation  induced  upon  the  ray  of  light  was  one  way; 
and  when  the  current  was  changed  to  the  contrary  direction,  the 
rotation  was  the  other  way.  In  order  to  express  the  direction, 
I  will  assume,  as  is  usually  done,  that  the  current  passes  from 
the  zinc  through  the  acid  to  the  platinum  in  the  same  cell  (663. 
667.  1627.) :  if  such  a  current  pass  under  the  ray  towards  the 
right,  upwards  on  its  right  side,  and  over  the  ray  towards  the 
left,  it  will  give  left-handed  rotation  to  it;  or,  if  the  current  pass 
over  the  ray  to  the  right,  down  on  the  right  side,  and  under  it 
towards  the  left,  it  will  induce  it  to  rotate  to  the  right-hand. 

2199.  The  law,  therefore,  by  which  an  electric  current  acts 
on  a  ray  of  light  is  easily  expressed.  When  an  electric  current 
passes  round  a  ray  of  polarized  light  in  a  plane  perpendicular  to 
the  ray,  it  causes  the  ray  to  revolve  on  its  axis,  as  long  as  it  is 
under  the  influence  of  the  current,  in  the  same  direction  as  that 
in  which  the  current  is  passing. 

2200.  The  simplicity  of  this  law,  and  its  identity  with  that 
given  before,  as  expressing  the  action  of  magnetism  on  light 
(2160.),  is  very  beautiful.  A  model  is  not  wanted  to  assist  the 
memory;  but  if  that  already  described  (2161.)  "be  looked  at,  the 
line  round  it  will  express  at  the  same  time  the  direction  both  of 
the  current  and  the  rotation.  It  will  indeed  do  much  more ; 
for  if  the  cyUnder  be  considered  as  a  piece  of  iron,  and  not  a 
piece  of  glass  or  other  diamagnetic,  placed  between  the  two  poles 
N  and  S,  then  the  line  round  it  will  represent  the  direction  of  the 
currents,  which,  according  to  Ampere's  theory,  are  moving 
round  its  particles ;  or  if  it  be  considered  as  a  core  of  iron  (in 
place  of  a  core  of  water),  having  an  electric  current  running 
round  it  in  the  direction  of  the  line,  it  will  also  represent  such  a 


Nov.  1845.]      Rotation  of  a  ray  by  electricity.  15 

mao-net  as  would  be  formed  if  it  were  placed  between  the  poles 
whose  marks  are  affixed  to  its  ends. 

2201.  I  will  now  notice  certain  points  respecting  the  degree 
of  this  action  under  different  circumstances.  By  using  a  tube 
of  water  (2194.)  as  long  as  the  helix,  but  placing  it  so  that  more 
or  less  of  the  tube  projected  at  either  end  of  the  hehx,  I  was 
able,  in  some  degree,  to  ascertain  the  effect  of  length  of  the  dia- 
magnetic,  the  force  of  the  helix  and  current  remaining  the  same. 
The  greater  the  column  of  water  subjected  to  the  action  of  the 
hehx,  the  greater  was  the  rotation  of  the  polarized  ray;  and  the 
amount  of  rotation  seemed  to  be  directly  proportionate  to  the 
length  of  fluid  round  which  the  electric  current  passed. 

2202.  A  short  tube  of  water,  or  a  piece  of  heavy  glass,  being 
placed  in  the  axis  of  the  Woolwich  helix  (2192.),  seemed  to  pro- 
duce equal  effect  on  the  ray  of  light,  whether  it  were  in  the  middle 
of  the  helix  or  at  either  end;  provided  it  was  always  within  the 
helix  and  in  the  line  of  the  axis.  From  this  it  would  appear 
that  every  part  of  the  helix  has  the  same  effect ;  and,  that  by 
using  long  hehces,  substances  may  be  submitted  to  this  kind  of 
examination  w^hich  could  not  be  placed  in  sufficient  length 
between  the  poles  of  magnets  (2150.). 

2203.  A  tube  of  water  as  long  as  the  Woolwich  helix  (2192.), 
but  only  0*4  of  an  inch  in  diameter,  was  placed  in  the  helix 
parallel  to  the  axis,  but  sometimes  in  the  axis  and  sometimes 
near  the  side.  No  apparent  difference  was  produced  in  these 
different  situations ;  and  I  am  inclined  to  believe  (without  being 
quite  sure)  that  the  action  on  the  ray  is  the  same,  wherever  the 
tube  is  placed,  within  the  helix,  in  relation  to  the  axis.  The 
same  result  was  obtained  when  a  larger  tube  of  water  was  looked 
through,  whether  the  ray  passed  through  the  axis  of  the  helix 
and  tube,  or  near  the  side. 

2204.  If  bodies  be  introduced  into  the  helix  possessing,  natu- 
rally, rotating  force,  then  the  rotating  power  given  by  the  electric 
current  is  superinduced  upon  them,  exactly  as  in  the  cases  al- 
ready described  of  magnetic  action  (2165.  21 87.)' 

2205.  A  helix,  20  inches  long  and  0*3  of  an  inch  in  diameter, 
was  made  of  uncovered  copper  wire,  0*05  of  an  inch  in  dia- 
meter, in  close  spirals.  This  was  placed  in  a  large  tube  of 
water,  so  that  the  fluid,  both  in  the  inside  and  at  the  outside  of 
the  helix,  could  be  examined  by  the  polarized  ray.    When  the 


16 


Action  of  electric  cun'ents  on  liyht.  [Series  XIX. 


current  was  sent  through  the  helix,  the  water  within  it  received 
rotating  power;  but  no  trace  of  such  an  action  on  the  hght  was 
seen  on  the  outside  of  the  helix,  even  in  the  Hne  most  close  to 
the  uncovered  wire. 

2206.  The  water  was  enclosed  in  brass  and  copper  tubes,  but 
this  alteration  caused  not  the  slightest  change  in  the  effect. 

2207.  The  water  in  the  brass  tube  was  put  into  an  iron  tube, 
much  longer  than  either  the  Woolwich  helix  or  the  brass  tube, 
and  quite  one-eighth  of  an  inch  thick  in  the  side ;  yet  when 
placed  in  the  Woolwich  helix  (2192.),  the  water  rotated  the  ray 
of  light  apparently  as  well  as  before. 

2208.  An  iron  bar,  1  inch  square  and  longer  than  the  helix, 
was  put  into  the  helix,  and  the  small  water  tube  (2203.)  upon  it. 
The  water  exerted  as  much  action  on  the  light  as  before. 

2209.  Three  iron  tubes,  each  27  inches  long  and  one-eighth 
of  an  inch  in  thickness  in  the  side,  were  selected  of  such  dia- 
meters as  to  pass  easily  one  into  the  other,  and  the  whole 
into  the  Woolwich  heUx  (2192.).  The  smaller  one  was  sup- 
plied with  glass  ends  and  filled  with  water ;  and  being  placed 
in  the  axis  of  the  Woolwich  helix,  had  a  certain  amount  of  ro- 
tating power  over  the  polarized  ray.  The  second  tube  was  then 
placed  over  this,  so  that  there  was  now  a  thickness  of  iron  equal 
to  two-eighths  of  an  inch  between  the  water  and  the  helix ;  the 
water  had  more  power  of  rotation  than  before.  On  placing  the 
third  tube  of  iron  over  the  two  former,  the  power  of  the  water 
fell,  but  was  still  very  considerable.  These  results  are  compli- 
cated, being  dependent  on  the  new  condition  which  the  character 
of  iron  gives  to  its  action  on  the  forces.  Up  to  a  certain 
amount,  by  increasing  the  development  of  magnetic  forces,  the 
helix  and  core,  as  a  whole,  produce  increased  action  on  the 
water ;  but  on  the  addition  of  more  iron  and  the  disposal  of  the 
forces  through  it,  their  action  is  removed  in  part  from  the  water 
and  the  rotation  is  lessened. 

2210.  Pieces  of  heavy  glass  (2151.),  placed  in  iron  tubes  in 
the  helices,  produced  similar  effects. 

2211.  The  bodies  \vhich  were  submitted  to  the  action  of  an 
electric' current  in  a  helix,  in  the  manner  already  described, 
were  as  follows : -Heavy  glass  (2151.  2176.),  water,  solution  of 
sulohate  of  soda,  solution  of  tartaric  acid,  alcohol,  rethcr,  and  od 
of  turpentine ;  all  of  which  were  affected,  and  acted  on  light 


Nov.  1845.]    Rotation  of  light  by  electric  force.  •  17 

exactly  in  the  manner  described  in  relation  to  magnetic  action 
(2173.). 

2212.  I  submitted  air  to  the  influence  of  these  helices  care- 
fully and  anxiously,  but  could  not  discover  any  trace  of  action 
on  the  polarized  ray  of  light.  I  put  the  long  helix  (2190.)  into 
the  other  two  (2191.  2192.),  and  combined  them  all  into  one 
consistent  series,  so  as  to  accumulate  power,  but  could  not  ob- 
serve any  effect  of  them  on  light  passing  through  air. 

2213.  In  the  use  of  helices,  it  is  necessary  to  be  aware  of  one 
effect,  which  might  otherwise  cause  confusion  and  trouble.  At 
first,  the  wire  of  the  long  helix  (2190.)  was  wound  directly  upon 
the  thin  glass  tube  which  served  to  contain  the  fluid.  When 
the  electric  current  passed  through  the  helix  it  raised  the  tem- 
perature of  the  metal,  and  that  gradually  raised  the  temperature 
of  the  glass  and  the  film  of  water  in  contact  with  it,  and  so  the 
cylinder  of  water,  warmer  at  its  surface  than  its  axis,  acted  as  a 
lens,  gathering  and.  sending  rays  of  light  to  the  eye,  and  con- 
tinuing to  act  for  a  time  after  the  current  was  stopped.  By 
separating  the  tube  of  water  from  the  helix,  and  by  other  pre- 
cautions, this  source  of  confusion  is  easily  avoided. 

2214.  Another  point  of  which  the  experimenter  should  be 
aware,  is  the  difficulty,  and  almost  impossibility,  of  obtain- 
ing a  piece  of  glass  which,  especially  after  it  is  cut,  does  not  de- 
polarize hght.  When  it  does  depolarize,  difference  of  position 
makes  an  immense  difference  in  the  appearance.  By  always 
referring  to  the  parts  that  do  not  depolarize,  as  the  black  cross, 
for  instance,  and  by  bringing  the  eye  as  near  as  may  be  to  the 
glass,  this  difficulty  is  more  or  less  overcome. 


2215.  For  the  sake  of  supplying  a  general  indication  of  the 
amount  of  this  induced  rotating  force  in  two  or  three  bodies, 
and  without  any  pretence  of  offering  correct  numbers,  I  will 
give,  generally,  the  result  of  a  few  attempts  to  measure  the  force, 
and  compare  it  with  the  natural  power  of  a  specimen  of  oil  of 
turpentine.  A  very  powerful  electro-magnet  was  employed, 
with  a  constant  distance  between  its  poles  of  2i  inches.  In  this 
space  was  placed  different  substances ;  the  amount  of  rotation 
of  the  eye-piece  observed  several  times  and  the  average  taken, 
as  expressing  the  rotation  for  the  ray  length  of  substance  used. 

VOL.  III.  c 


18  Rotation  of  light  by  magnetic  force.  [Series  XIX. 

But  as  the  substances  were  of  different  dimensions,  the  ray 
lengths  were,  by  calculation,  corrected  to  one  standard  length, 
upon  the  assumption  that  the  power  was  proportionate  to  this 
length  (2163.).  The  oil  of  turpentine  was  of  course  observed  in 
its  natural  state,  i.  e.  without  magnetic  action.  Making  water 
1,  the  numbers  were  as  follows  :  — 

Oil  of  turpentine  .    .    .    .    11  "8 
'Heavy  glass  (2151.)   ...  6*0 


FHnt-glass  2*8 

Rock-salt  2-2  , 

Water  1-0 

Alcohol  less  than  water. 

^ther  less  than  alcohol. 


2216.  In  relation  to  the  action  of  magnetic  and  electric  forces 
on  light,  I  consider,  that  to  know  the  conditions  under  which 
there  is  no  apparent  action,  is  to  add  to  our  knowledge  of  their 
mutual  relations;  and  will,  therefore,  very  briefly  state  how  I  have 
lately  combined  these  forces,  obtaining  no  apparent  result(955.). 

2217.  Heavy  glass,  flint-glass,  rock  crystal,  Iceland  spar,  oil 
of  turpentine,  and  air,  had  a  polarized  ray  passed  through  them; 
and,  at  the  same  time,  lines  of  electro-static  tension  (2149.) 
were,  by  means  of  coatings,  the  Ley  den  jar,  and  the  electric 
machine,  directed  across  the  bodies,  parallel  to  the  polarized  ray, 
and  perpendicular  to  it,  both  in  and  across  the  plane  of  polariza- 
tion ;  but  without  any  visible  effect.  The  tension  of  a  rapidly 
recurring,  induced  secondary  current,  was  also  directed  upon 
the  same  bodies  and  upon  water  (as  an  electrolyte),  but  with  the 
same  negative  result. 

2218.  A  polarized  ray,  powerful  magnetic  lines  of  force,  and 
the  electric  lines  of  force  (2149.)  just  described,  were  combined 
in  various  directions  in  their  action  on  heavy  glass  (2151.  2176.), 
but  with  no  other  result  than  that  due  to  the  mutual  action  of 
the  magnetic  lines  of  light,  already  described  in  this  paper. 

2219.  A  polarized  ray  and  electric  currents  were  combined  in 
every  possible  way  in  electrolytes  (951-954).  The  substances 
used  were  distilled  water,  solution  of  sugar,  dilute  sulphuric 
acid,  solution  of  sulphate  of  soda,  using  platinum  electrodes;  and 
solution  of  sulphate  of  copper,  using  copper  electrodes:  the 
current  w^as  sent  along  the  ray,  and  perpendicular  to  it  in  two 


Nov.  1845.]      Relation  of  light  to  magnetism. 


19 


directions  at  right  angles  with  each  other;  the  ray  was  made  to 
rotate,  by  altering  the  position  of  the  polarizing  mirror,  that  the 
plane  of  polarization  might  be  varied ;  the  current  was  used  as 
a  continuous  current,  as  a  rapidly  intermitting  current,  and  as 
a  rapidly  alternating  double  current  of  induction;  but  in  no  case 
was  any  trace  of  action  perceived. 

2220.  Lastly,  a  ray  of  polarized  light,  electric  currents,  and 
magnetic  lines  of  force,  were  directed  in  every  possible  way 
through  dilute  sulphuric  acid  and  solution  of  sulphate  of  soda, 
but  still  with  negative  results,  except  in  those  positions  where 
the  phaenomena  already  described  were  produced.  In  one 
arrangement,  the  current  passed  in  the  direction  of  radii  from  a 
central  to  a  circumferential  electrode,  the  contrary  magnetic 
poles  being  placed  above  and  below;  and  the  arrangements  were 
so  good,  that  when  the  electric  current  was  passing,  the  fluid 
rapidly  rotated;  but  a  polarized  ray  sent  horizontally  across  this 
arrangement  was  not  at  all  affected.  Also,  when  the  ray  was 
sent  vertically  through  it,  and  the  eye-piece  mdved  to  corre- 
spond to  the  rotation  impressed  upon  the  ray  in  this  position 
by  the  magnetic  curves  alone,  the  superinduction  of  the  passage 
of  the  electric  current  made  not  the  least  difference  in  the  effect 
upon  the  ray. 


^  iii.  General  considerations. 

2221.  Thus  is  established,  I  think  for  the  first  time',  a  true, 
direct  relation  and  dependence  between  light  and  the  magnetic 
and  electric  forces ;  and  thus  a  great  addition  made  to  the  facts 

^  I  say,  for  the  first  time,  because  I  do  not  think  that  the  experiments  of 
Morrichini  on  the  production  of  magnetism  by  the  rays  at  the  violet  end  of 
the  spectrum  prove  any  such  relation.  When  in  Rome  with  Sir  H.  Davy  in 
the  month  of  May  1814,  I  spent  several  hours  at  the  house  of  Morrichini, 
workmg  with  his  apparatus  and  under  his  directions,  but  could  not  succeed 
m  magnetising  a  needle.  I  have  no  confidence  in  the  effect  as  a  direct  result 
of  the  action  of  the  sun's  rays ;  but  think,  that  when  it  has  occurred  it  has 
been  secondary,  mcidental,  and  perhaps  even  accidental ;  a  result  that  might 
well  happen  with  a  needle  that  was  preserved  during  the  whole  experiment  in 
a  north  and  south  position. 

January  2,  1846.-I  should  not  have  written  "for  the  first  time  "  as  above, 
th  ^  ^  '■^;"^""bered  Mr.  Christie's  experiments  and  papers  on  the  Influence  of 
fn!  Magnets,  communicated  in  the  Philosophical  Transactions 

lor  1826,  p.  219,  and  1828,  p.  379.— M.  F. 

c  2 


20 


Relation  of  light  to  magnetism.    [Series  XIX. 


and  considerations  which  tend  to  prove  that  all  natural  forces 
are  tied  together,  and  have  one  common  origin  (2146.).  It  is, 
no  doubt,  difficult  in  the  present  state  of  our  knowledge  to  ex- 
press our  expectation  in  exact  terms ;  and,  though  I  have  said 
that  another  of  the  powers  of  nature  is,  in  these  experiments, 
directly  related  to  the  rest,  I  ought,  perhaps,  rather  to  say  that 
another  form  of  the  great  power  is  distinctly  and  directly  related 
to  the  other  forms ;  or,  that  the  great  power  manifested  by  par- 
ticular phaenoraena  in  particular  forms,  is  here  further  identified 
and  recognized,  by  the  direct  relation  of  its  form  of  light  to  its 
forms  of  electricity  and  magnetism. 

2222.  The  relation  existing  between  j^o/ari^-ec?  light  and  mag- 
netism and  electricity,  is  even  more  interesting  than  if  it  had 
been  shown  to  exist  with  common  light  only.  It  cannot  but 
extend  to  common  light ;  and,  as  it  belongs  to  light  made,  in  a 
certain  respect,  more  precise  in  its  character  and  properties  by 
polarization,  it  collates  and  connects  it  with  these  powers,  in 
that  duality  ef  character  which  they  possess,  and  yields  an 
opening,  which  before  was  wanting  to  us,  for  the  appliance  of 
these  powers  to  the  investigation  of  the  nature  of  this  and  other 
radiant  agencies. 

222.3.  Referring  to  the  conventional  distinction  before  made 
(2149.),  it  may  be  again  stated,  that  it  is  the  magnetic  lines  of 
force  only  which  are  effectual  on  the  rays  of  light,  and  they  only 
(in  appearance)  when  parallel  to  the  ray  of  light,  or  as  they  tend 
to  parallelism  with  it.  As,  in  reference  to  matter  not  magnetic 
after  the  manner  of  iron,  the  phaenomena  of  electric  induction 
and  electrolyzation  show  a  vast  superiority  in  the  energy  with 
which  electric  forces  can  act  as  compared  to  magnetic  forces,  so 
here,  in  another  direction  and  in  the  pecuHar  and  correspondent 
effects  which  belong  to  magnetic  forces,  they  are  shown,  in  turn, 
to  possess  great  superiority,  and  to  have  their  full  equivalent  of 
action  on  the  same  kind  of  matter. 

2224.  The  magnetic  forces  do  not  act  on  the  ray  of  light 
directly  and  without  the  intervention  of  matter,  but  through 
the  mediation  of  the  substance  in  which  they  and  the  ray  have 
a  simultaneous  existence ;  the  substances  and  the  forces  giving 
to  and  receiving  from  each  other  the  power  of  acting  on  the 
light.  This  is  shown  by  the  non-action  of  a  vacuum,  of  air  or 
gases  J  and  it  is  also  further  shown  by  the  special  degree  in 


Nov.  1845.]       Relation  of  light  to  magnetism. 


21 


which  different  matters  possess  the  property.  That  magnetic 
force  acts  upon  the  ray  of  light  always  with  the  same  character 
of  manner  and  in  the  same  direction,  independent  of  the  differ- 
ent varieties  of  substance,  or  their  states  of  solid  or  liquid,  or 
their  specific  rotative  force  (2232.),  shows  that  the  magnetic 
force  and  the  light  have  a  direct  relation :  but  that"substances 
are  necessary,  and  that  these  act  in  different  degrees,  shows  that 
the  magnetism  and  the  light  act  on  each  other  through  the  in- 
tervention of  the  matter. 

2225.  Recognizing  or  perceiving  matter  only  by  its  powers, 
and  knowing  nothing  of  any  imaginary  nucleus,  abstract  from 
the  idea  of  these  powers,  the  phaenomena  described  in  this  paper 
much  strengthen  my  inclination  to  trust  in  the  views  1  have  on 
a  former  occasion  advanced  in  reference  to  its  nature'. 

2226.  It  cannot  be  doubted  that  the  magnetic  forces  act  upon 
and  affect  the  internal  constitution  of  the  diamagnetic,  just  as 
freely  in  the  dark  as  when  a  ray  of  light  is  passing  through  it ; 
though  the  pheenomena  produced  by  light  seem,  as  yet,  to  pre- 
sent the  only  means  of  observing  this  constitution  and  the  change. 
Further,  any  such  change  as  this  must  belong  to  opake  bodies, 
such  as  wood,  stone,  and  metal;  for  as  diamagnetics,  there  is  no 
distinction  between  them  and  those  which  are  transparent. 
The  degree  of  transparency  can  at  the  utmost,  in  this  respect, 
only  make  a  distinction  between  the  individuals  of  a  class. 

2227.  If  the  magnetic  forces  had  made  these  bodies  magnets,  • 
we  could,  by  light,  have  examined  a  transparent  magnet ;  and 

that  would  have  been  a  great  help  to  our  investigation  of  the 
forces  of  matter.  But  it  does  not  make  them  magnets  (2171.), 
and  therefore  the  molecular  condition  of  these  bodies,  when  in 
the  state  described,  must  be  specifically  distinct  from  that  of 
magnetized  iron,  or  other  such  matter,  and  must  be  a  new  mag- 
netic condition;  and  as  the  condition  is  a  state  of  tension  (mani- 
fested by  its  instantaneous  return  to  the  normal  state  when  the 
magnetic  induction  is  removed),  so  the  force  which  the  matter 
m  this  state  possesses  and  its  mode  of  action,  must  be  to  us  a 
new  magnetic  force  or  mode  of  action  of  matter. 

2228.  For  it  is  impossible,  I  think,  to  observe  find  see  the 
action  of  magnetic  forces,  rising  in  intensity,  upon  a  piece  of  heavy 
glass  or  a  tube  of  water,  without  also  perceiving  that  the  latter 

'  Vol.  ii.p.  284,  or  Philosophical  Magazine,  1844,  vol.  xxiv.  p.  136. 


22 


Rotation  of  liyht  by  maymtism.  [Series  XIX. 


acquire  properties  which  are  not  only  new  to  the  substance,  but 
are  also  in  subjection  to  very  definite  and  precise  laws  (2160. 
2199.),  and  are  equivalent  in  proportion  to  the  magnetic  forces 
producing  them. 

2229.  Perhaps  this  state  is  a  state  of  electric  tension  tending 
to  a  current ;  as  in  magnets,  according  to  Ampere's  theory,  the 
state  is  a  state  of  current.    When  a  core  of  iron  is  put  into  a 
helix,  everything  leads  us  to  believe  that  currents  of  electricity 
are  produced  within  it,  which  rotate  or  move  in  a  plane  perpen- 
dicular to  the  axis  of  the  helix.    If  a  diamagnetic  be  placed  in 
the  same  position,  it  acquires  power  to  make  light  rotate  in  the 
same  plane.    The  state  it  has  received  is  a  state  of  tension,  but 
it  has  not  passed  on  into  currents,  though  the  acting  force  and 
every  other  circumstance  and  condition  are  the  same  as  those 
which  do  produce  currents  in  iron,  nickel,  cobalt,  and  such 
other  matters  as  are  fitted  to  receive  them.    Hence  the  idea  that 
there  exists  in  diamagnetics,  under  such  circumstances,  a  ten- 
dency to  currents,  is  consistent  with  all  the  phaenomena  as  yet 
described,  and  is  further  strengthened  by  the  fact,  that,  leaving 
the  loadstone  or  the  electric  current,  which  by  inductive  action 
is  rendering  a  piece  of  iron,  nickel,  or  cobalt  magnetic,  perfectly 
unchanged,  a  mere  change  of  temperature  will  take  from  these 
bodies  their  extra  power,  and  make  them  pass  into  the  common 
class  of  diamagnetics. 


2230.  The  present  is,  I  believe,  the  first  time  that  the  mole- 
cular condition  of  a  body,  required  to  produce  the  circular  po- 
larization of  light,  has  been  artificially  given ;  and  it  is  therefore 
very  interesting  to  consider  this  known  state  and  condition  of  the 
body,  comparing  it  with  the  relatively  unknown  state  of  those 
which  possess  the  power  naturally:  especially  as  some  of  the  lat- 
ter rotate  to  the  right-hand  and  others  to  the  left;  and,  as  in  the 
cases  of  quartz  and  oil  of  turpentine,  the  same  body  chemically 
speaking,  being  in  the  latter  instance  a  liquid  with  particles  free 
to  move,  presents  different  specimens,  some  rotating  one  way 
and  some  the  other. 

2231.  At  first  one  would  be  inclined  to  conclude  that  the 
natural  state  and  the  state  conferred  by  magnetic  and  electric 
forces  must  be  the  same,  since  the  effect  is  the  same;  but  on 


Nov.  1845.]  Natural  and  magnetic  rotation  compared.  23 


further  consideration  it  seems  very  difficult  to  come  to  such  a 
conckision.  Oil  of  turpentine  will  rotate  a  ray  of  light,  the 
power  depending  upon  its  particles  and  not  upon  the  arrange- 
ment of  the  mass.  Whichever  way  a  ray  of  polarized  light 
passes  through  this  fluid,  it  is  rotated  in  the  same  manner; 
and  rays  passing  in  every  possible  direction  through  it  simulta- 
neously are  all  rotated  with  equal  force  and  according  to  one 
common  law  of  direction;  i.  e.  either  all  right-handed  or  else  all 
to  the  left.  Not  so  with  the  rotation  superinduced  on  the  same 
oil  of  turpentine  by  the  magnetic  or  electric  forces :  it  exists 
only  in  one  direction,  i.  e.  in  a  plane  perpendicular  to  the  mag- 
netic line;  and  being  limited  to  this  plane,  it  can  be  changed  in 
direction  by  a  reversal  of  the  direction  of  the  inducing  force. 
The  direction  of  the  rotation  produced  by  the  natural  state  is 
connected  invariably  with  the  direction  of  the  ray  of  light ;  but 
the  power  to  produce  it  appears  to  be  possessed  in  every  direc- 
tion and  at  all  times  by  the  particles  of  the  fluid :  the  direction 
of  the  rotation  produced  by  the  induced  condition  is  connected 
invariably  with  the  direction  of  the  magnetic  line  or  the  electric 
current,  and  the  condition  is  possessed  by  the  particles  of  mat- 
ter, but  strictly  Hmited  by  the  line  or  the  current,  changing  and 
disappearing  with  it. 

2232.  Let  m,  in  'fig.  3,  represent  a  glass  cell  filled  with  oil  of 
turpentine,  possessing  naturally  the  power  of  producing  right- 
hand  rotation,  and  a  b  o.  polarized  ray  of  light.  If  the  ray  pro- 
ceed from  a  to  b,  and  the  eye  be  placed  at  b,  the  rotation  will 
be  right-handed,  or  according  to  the  Fig.  3. 

direction  expressed  by  the  arrow  heads  ,a 
on  the  circle  c;  if  the  ray  proceed 
from  b  to  a,  and  the  eye  be  placed  at  a, 
the  rotation  will  still  be  right-handed  to 
the  observer,  i.  e.  according  to  the 
direction  indicated  on  the  circle  d.  Let 
now  an  electric  current  pass  round  the 
oil  of  turpentine  in  the  direction  indi- 
cated on  the  circle  c,  or  magnetic  poles 
be  placed  so  as  to  produce  the  same 
effect  (2155.);  the  particles  will  ac- 
quire a  further  rotative  force  (which  no 
motion  amongst  themselves  will  disturb),  and  u  ray  coming  from 


24       Natural  and  magnetic  rotation  compared.  [Series  XIX. 

o  to  6  will  be  seen  by  an  eye  placed  at  b  to  rotate  to  the  right- 
hand  more  than  before,  or  in  the  direction  on  the  circle  c ;  but 
pass  a  ray  from  b  to  a,  and  observe  with  the  eye  at  a,  and 
the  phaenomenon  is  no  longer  the  same  as  before;  for  instead  of 
the  new  rotation  being  according  to  the  direction  indicated  on 
the  circle  d,  it  will  be  in  the  contrary  direction,  or  to  the  obser- 
ver's left-hand  (2199.).  In  fact  the  induced  rotation  will  be 
added  to  the  natural  rotation  as  respects  a  ray  passing  from  a  to 
b,  but  it  will  be  subtracted  from  the  natural  rotation  as  regards 
the  ray  passing  from  b  to  a.  Hence  the  particles  of  this  fluid 
which  rotate  by  virtue  of  their  natural  force,  and  those  which 
rotate  by  virtue  of  the  induced  force,  cannot  be  in  the  same 
condition. 

2233.  As  respects  the  power  of  the  oil  of  turpentine  to  rotate 
a  ray  in  whatever  direction  it  is  passing  through  the  liquid,  it 
may  well  be,  that  though  all  the  particles  possess  the  power  of 
rotating  the  light,  only  those  whose  planes  of  rotation  are  more 
or  less  perpendicular  to  the  ray  affect  it;  and  that  it  is  the  result- 
ant or  sum  of  forces  in  any  one  direction  which  is  active  in  pro- 
ducing rotation.  But  even  then  a  striking  difference  remains, 
because  the  resultant  in  the  same  plane  is  not  absolute  in  direc- 
tion, but  relative  to  the  course  of  the  ray,  being  in  the  one  case 
as  the  circle  c,  and  in  the  other  as  the  circle  d,  fig.  3 ;  whereas 
the  resultant  of  the  magnetic  or  electric  induction  is  absolute, 
and  not  changing  with  the  course  of  the  ray,  being  always  either 
as  expressed  by  c  or  else  as  indicated  by  d. 

2234.  All  these  differences,  however,  ^vill  doubtless  disap- 
pear or  come  into  harmony  as  these  investigations  are  extended; 
and  their  very  existence  opens  so  many  paths,  by  which  we 
may  pursue  our  inquiries,  more  and  more  deeply,  into  the 
powers  and  constitution  of  matter. 

2235.  Bodies  having  rotating  power  of  themselves,  do  not 
seem  by  that  to  have  a  greater  or  a  less  tendency  to  assume  a 
further  degree  of  the  same  force  under  the  influence  of  magnetic 
or  electric  power. 

2236.  Were  it  not  for  these  and  other  differences,  we  might 
see  an  analogy  between  those  bodies,  which  possess  at  all  times 
the  rotating  power,  as  a  specimen  of  quartz  which  rotates  only 
in  one  plane,  and  also  those  to  which  the  power  is  given  by  the 
induction  of  other  forces,  as  a  prism  of  heavy  glass  in  a  helix. 


Nov.  1845.]  Magnetic  rotation  of  light.  25 

on  the  one  hand;  and,  on  the  other,  a  natural  magnet  and  a  helix 
through  which  the  current  is  passing.  The  natural  condition 
of  the  magnet  and  quartz,  and  the  constrained  condition  of  the 
hehx  and  heavy  glass,  form  the  link  of  the  analogy  in  one  direc- 
tion ;  whilst  the  supposition  of  currents  existing  in  the  magnet 
and  helix,  and  only  a  tendency  or  tension  to  currents  existing 
in  the  quartz  and  heavy  glass,  supplies  the  link  in  the  transverse 
direction. 

2237.  As  to  those  bodies  which  seem  as  yet  to  give  no  indi- 
cation of  the  power  over  light,  and  therefore  none  of  the  assump- 
tion of  the  new  magnetic  conditions,  these  may  be  divided  into 
two  classes,  the  one  including  air,  gases  and  vapours,  and  the 
other  rock  crystal,  Iceland  spar,  and  certain  other  crystalline 
bodies.  As  regards  the  latter  class,  I  shall  give,  in  the  next 
series  of  these  researches,  proofs  drawn  from  pheenomena  of  an 
entirely  different  kind,  that  they  do  acquire  the  new  magnetic 
condition ;  and  these  being  so  disposed  of  for  the  moment,  I  am 
inchned  to  believe  that  even  air  and  gases  have  the  power  to 
assume  the  peculiar  state,  and  even  to  affect  light,  but  in  a  de- 
gree so  small  that  as  yet  it  has  not  been  made  sensible.  Still 
the  gaseous  state  is  such  a  remarkable  condition  of  matter,  that 
we  ought  not  too  hastily  to  assume  that  the  substances  which, 
in  the  solid  and  liquid  state,  possess  properties  even  general  in 
character,  always  carry  these  into  their  gaseous  condition. 

2238.  Rock-salt,  fluor-spar,  and,  I  think,  alum,  affect  the  ray 
of  light;  the  other  crystals  experimented  with  did  not;  these 
are  equiaxed  and  singly  refracting,  the  others  are  unequiaxed 
and  doubly  refracting.  Perhaps  these  instances,  with  that  of 
the  rotation  of  quartz,  may  even  now  indicate  a  relation  between 
magnetism,  electricity,  and  the  crystallizing  forces  of  matter. 

2239.  All  bodies  are  affected  by  helices  as  by  magnets,  and 
according  to  laws  which  show  that  the  causes  of  the  action  are 
identical  as  well  as  the  effects.  This  result  supplies  another 
fine  proof  in  favour  of  the  identity  of  helices  and  magnets,  ac- 
cording to  the  views  of  Ampere. 

2240.  The  theory  of  static  induction  which  I  formerly  ventured 
to  set  forth  (1161,  &c.),  and  which  depends  upon  the  action  of 
the  contiguous  particles  of  the  dielectric  intervening  between  the 
inductric  and  the  inducteous  bodies,  led  me  to  expect  that  the 
same  kind  of  dependence  upon  the  intervening  particles  would 


26 


Magnetic  rotation  of  light.       [Series  XIX. 


be  found  to  exist  in  magnetic  action ;  and  I  published  certain 
experiments  and  considerations  on  this  point  seven  years  ago 
(1709-1 736.).  I  could  not  then  discover  any  peculiar  con- 
dition of  the  intervening  substance  or  diamagnetic;  but  now 
that  I  have  been  able  to  make  out  such  a  state,  which  is  not 
only  a  state  of  tension  (2227-),  but  dependent  entirely  upon  the 
magnetic  lines  which  pass  through  the  substance,  I  am  more 
than  ever  encouraged  to  believe  that  the  view  then  advanced  is 
correct. 

2241.  Although  the  magnetic  and  electric  forces  appear  to 
exert  no  power  on  the  ordinary  or  on  the  depolarized  ray  of 
light,  we  can  hardly  doubt  but  that  they  have  some  special  influ- 
ence, which  probably  will  soon  be  made  apparent  by  experiment. 
Neither  can  it  be  supposed  otherwise  than  that  the  same  kind 
of  action  should  take  place  on  the  other  forms  of  radiant  agents 
as  heat  and  chemical  force. 

2242.  This  mode  of  magnetic  and  electric  action,  and  the 
phsenomena  presented  by  it,  will,  I  hope,  greatly  assist  hereafter 
in  the  investigation  of  the  nature  of  transparent  bodies,  of  hght, 
of  magnets,  and  their  action  one  on  another  or  on  magnetic 
substances.   I  am  at  this  time  engaged  in  investigating  the  new 
magnetic  condition,  and  shall  shortly  send  a  further  account  of 
it  to  the  Royal  Society.    What  the  possible  effect  of  the  force 
may  be  in  the  earth  as  a  whole  or  in  magnets,  or  in  relation  to 
the  sun,  and  what  may  be  the  best  means  of  causing  light  to 
evolve  electricity  and  magnetism,  are  thoughts  continually  press- 
ing upon  the  mind ;  but  it  will  be  better  to  occupy  both  time 
and  thought,  aided  by  experiment,  in  the  investigation  and  de- 
velopment of  real  truth,  than  to  use  them  in  the  invention  of 
suppositions  which  may  or  may  not  be  founded  on,  or  consistent 
with,  fact. 

Royal  Institution, 
Oct.  29,  1845. 


.1 


27 


TWENTIETH  SERIES  ^ 

^27.  On  new  magnetic  actions,  and  on  the  magnetic  condition  of 
all  matter^.  If  i.  Apparatus  required.  ^  ii.  Action  of  mag- 
nets on  heavy  glass.  ^  iii.  Action  of  magnets  on  other  sub- 
stances acting  magnetically  on  light.  iv.  Action  of  magnets 
on  the  metals  generally. 

Received  December  6, — Read  December  18,  1845. 

2243.  The  contents  of  the  last  series  of  these  Researches  were, 
I  think,  sufficient  to  justify  the  statement,  that  a  new  magnetic 

'  Philosophical  Transactions,  1846,  p.  21. 

2  My  friend  Mr.  Wheatstone  has  this  day  called  my  attention  to  a  paper  by 
M,  Becquerel,  "  On  the  magnetic  actions  excited  in  all  bodies  by  the  influence 
of  very  energetic  magnets,"  read  to  the  Academy  of  Sciences  on  the  27th  of 
September  1827',  and  published  in  the  Annales  de  Chimie,  xxxvi.  p.  337.  It 
relates  to  the  action  of  the  magnet  on  a  magnetic  needle,  on  soft  iron,  on  the 
deutoxide  and  tritoxide  of  iron,  on  the  tritoxide  alone,  and  on  a  needle  of  wood. 
The  author  observed,  and  quotes  Coulomb  as  having  also  observed,  that  a 
needle  of  wood  under  certain  conditions,  pointed  across  the  magnetic  curves  j 
and  he  also  states  the  striking  fact  that  he  had  found  a  needle  of  wood  place 
itself  parallel  to  the  wires  of  a  galvanometer.  These  effects,  however,  he  refers 
to  a  degree  of  magnetism  less  than  that  of  the  tritoxide  of  iron,  but  the  same 
in  character,  for  the  bodies  take  the  same  position.  The  polarity  of  steel  and 
iron  is  stated  to  be  in  the  direction  of  the  length  of  the  substance,  but  that  of 
tritoxide  of  iron,  wood  and  gum-lac,  most  frequently  in  the  direction  of  the 
width,  and  always  when  one  magnetic  pole  is  employed.  "This  difference  of 
effect,  which  establishes  a  line  of  demarcation  between  these  two  species  of 
phaenomena,  is  due  to  this,  that  the  magnetism  being  very  feeble  in  the  trit- 
oxide of  iron,  wood,  &c.,  we  may  neglect  the  reaction  of  the  body  on  itself,  and 
therefore  the  direct  action  of  the  bar  ought  to  overrule  it." 

As  the  paper  does  not  refer  the  phccnomena  of  wood  and  gum-lac  to  an  ele- 
mentary repulsive  action,  nor  show  that  they  are  common  to  an  immense  class 
of  bodies,  nor  distinguish  this  class,  which  I  have  called  diamagnetic,  from  the 
magnetic  class ;  and,  as  it  makes  all  magnetic  action  of  one  kind,  whereas  I 
show  that  there  are  two  kinds  of  such  action,  as  distinct  from  each  other  as 
positive  and  negative  electric  action  are  in  their  way,  so  I  do  not  think  I  need 
alter  a  word  or  the  date  of  that  which  I  have  written;  but  am  most  glad  here 
to  acknowledge  M.  Becquerel's  important  facts  and  labours  in  reference  to  this 
subject.— M.  F.  Dec,  5,  1845. 


28 


On  new  magnetic  actions. 


[Series  XX. 


condition  (i.  e,  one  new  to  our  knowledge)  had  been  impressed 
on  matter  by  subjecting  it  to  the  action  of  magnetic  and  electric 
forces  (2227.) ;  which  new  condition  was  made  manifest  by  the 
powers  of  action  which  the  matter  had  acquired  over  light.  The 
phsenomena  now  to  be  described  are  altogether  different  in  their 
nature ;  and  they  prove,  not  only  a  magnetic  condition  of  the 
substances  referred  to  unknown  to  us  before,  but  also  of  many 
others,  including  a  vast  number  of  opake  and  metallic  b  oie, 
and  perhaps  all  except  the  magnetic  metals  and  their  com- 
pounds :  and  they  also,  through  that  condition,  present  us  with 
the  means  of  undertaking  the  correlation  of  magnetic  phaeno- 
mena,  and  perhaps  the  construction  of  a  theory  of  general  mag- 
netic action  founded  on  simple  fundamental  principles. 

2244.  The  whole  matter  is  so  new,  and  the  phaenomena  so 
varied  and  general,  that  I  must,  with  every  desire  to  be  brief, 
describe  much  which  at  last  will  be  found  to  concentrate  under 
simple  principles  of  action.  Still,  in  the  present  state  of  our 
knowledge,  such  is  the  only  method  by  which  I  can  make  these 
principles  and  their  results  sufficiently  manifest. 

^  i.  Apparatus  required. 

2245.  The  effects  to  be  described  require  magnetic  apparatus 
of  great  power,  and  under  perfect  command.  Both  these  points 
are  obtained  by  the  use  of  electro-magnets,  which  can  be  raised 
to  a  degree  of  force  far  beyond  that  of  natural  or  steel  magnets; 
and  further,  can  be  suddenly  altogether  deprived  of  power,  or 
made  energetic  to  the  highest  degree,  without  the  ^slightest 
alteration  of  the  arrangement,  or  of  any  other  circumstance 
belonging  to  an  experiment. 

2246.  One  of  the  electro-magnets  which  I  use  is  that  already 
described  under  the  terra  Woolwich  helix  (2192.).  The  soft 
iron  core  belonging  to  it  is  28  inches  in  length  and  2*5  inches 
in  diameter.  When  thrown  into  action  by  ten  pair  of  Grove's 
plates,  either  end  will  sustain  one  or  two  half-hundred  weights 
hanging  to  it.  The  magnet  can  be  placed  either  in  the  vertical 
or  the  horizontal  position.  The  iron  core  is  a  cylinder  with  flat 
ends,  but  I  have  had  a  cone  of  iron  made,  2  inches  in  diameter 
at  the  base  and  1  inch  in  height,  and  this  placed  at  the  end  of 
the  core,  forms  a  conical  termination  to  it,  when  required. 


Dec.  1845.] 


Apparatus  employed. 


29 


2247.  Another  magnet  which  I  have  had  made  has  the  horse- 
shoe form.  The  bar  of  iron  is  46  inches  in  length  and  3*75 
inches  in  diameter,  and  is  so  bent  that  the  extremities  forming 
the  poles  are  6  inches  from  each  other;  522  feet  of  copper  Mire 
0*17  of  an  inch  in  diameter,  and  covered  with  tape,  are  wound 
round  the  two  straight  parts  of  the  bar,  forming  two  coils  on 
these  parts,  each  16  inches  in  length,  and  composed  of  three 
layers  of  wire :  the  poles  are,  of  course,  6  inches  apart,  the 
ends  are  planed  true,  and  against  these  move  two  short  bars  of  soft 
iron,  7  inches  long  and  2|  by  1  inch  thick,  which  can  be  ad- 
justed by  screws,  and  held  at  any  distance  less  than  6  inches 
from  each  other.  The  ends  of  these  bars  form  the  opposite  poles 
of  contrary  name ;  the  magnetic  field  between  them  can  be 
made  of  greater  or  smaller  extent,  and  the  intensity  of  the  lines 
of  magnetic  force  be  proportionately  varied. 

2248.  For  the  suspension  of  substances  between  and  near  the 
poles  of  these  magnets,  I  occasionally  used  a  glass  jar,  with  a 
plate  and  sliding  wire  at  the  top.  Six  or  eight  lengths  of  cocoon 
silk  being  equally  stretched,  were  made  into  one  thread  and  at- 
tached, at  the  upper  end,  to  the  shding  rod,  and  at  the  lower 
end  to  a  stirrup  of  paper,  in  which  anything  to  be  experimented 
on  could  be  sustained. 

2249.  Another  very  useful  mode  of  suspension  was  to  attach 
one  end  of  a  fine  thread,  6  feet  long,  to  an  adjustible  arm  near 
the  ceiling  of  the  room,  and  terminating  at  the  lower  end  by  a 
little  ring  of  copper  wire ;  any  substance  to  be  suspended  could 
be  held  in  a  simple  cradle  of  fine  copper  wire  having  8  or  10 
inches  of  the  wire  prolonged  upward;  this  being  bent  into  a 
hook  at  the  superior  extremity,  gave  the  means  of  attachment  to 
the  ring.  The  height  of  the  suspended  substance  could  be  varied 
at  pleasure,  by  bending  any  part  of  the  wire  at  the  instant  into 
the  hook  form.  A  glass  cylinder  placed  between  the  magnetic 
poles  was  quite  sufficient  to  keep  the  suspended  substance  free 
from  any  motion,  due  to  the  agitation  of  the  air. 

2250.  It  is  necessary,  before  entering  upon  an  experimental 
mvestigation  with  such  an  apparatus,  to  be  aware  of  the  effect 
of  any  magnetism  which  the  bodies  used  may  possess;  the 
power  of  the  apparatus  to  make  manifest  such  magnetism  is  so 
great,  that  it  is  difficult  on  that  account  to  find  writing-paper  fit 
for  the  stirrup  above  mentioned.    Before  therefore  any  experi- 


30 


On  new  magnetic  actions. 


[Series  XX. 


ments  are  instituted,  it  must  be  ascertained  that  the  suspending 
apparatus  employed  does  not  point,  i.  e.  does  not  take  up  a  posi- 
tion parallel  to  the  lines  joining  the  magnetic  poles,  by  virtue  of 
the  magnetic  force.  When  copper  suspensions  are  employed,  a 
peculiar  effect  is  produced  (2309.),  but  when  understood,  as  it 
will  be  hereafter,  it  does  not  interfere  with  the  results  of  experi- 
ment. The  wire  should  be  fine,  not  magnetic  as  iron,  and  the 
form  of  the  suspending  cradle  should  not  be  elongated  horizon- 
tally, but  be  round  or  square  as  to  its  general  dimensions,  in 
that  direction. 

2251.  The  substances  to  be  experimented  with  should  be  care- 
fully examined,  and  rejected  if  not  found  free  from  magnetism. 
Their  state  is  easily  ascertained;  for,  if  magnetic,  they  will  either 
be  attracted  to  the  one  or  the  other  pole  of  the  great  magnet,  or 
else  point  between  them.  No  examination  by  smaller  magnets, 
or  by  a  magnetic  needle,  is  sufficient  for  this  purpose. 

2252.  I  shall  have  '^such  fre- 
quent occasion  to  refer  to  two  e 

chief  directions  of  position  across  !  ^ 

the  magnetic  field,  that  to  avoid  W/fM 
periphrasis,  I  will  here  ask  leave  — LMLL 
to  use  a  term  or  two,  condition-  ^ 
ally.    One  of  these  directions  is 

that  from  pole  to  pole,  or  along  the  line  of  magnetic  force ;  I 
will  call  it  the  axial  direction :  the  other  is  the  direction  perpen- 
dicular to  this,  and  across  the  line  of  magnetic  force ;  and  for 
the  time,  and  as  respects  the  space  between  the  poles,  I  will  call 
it  the  equatorial  direction.  Other  ter  ms  that  I  may  use,  1  hope 
will  explain  themselves. 

^  ii.  Action  of  magnets  on  heavy  glass. 

2253.  The  bar  of  silicated  borate  of  lead,  or  heavy  glass  al- 
ready described  as  the  substance  in  which  magnetic  forces  were 
first  made  effectually  to  bear  on  a  ray  of  hght  (2152.),  and 
which  is  2  inches  long,  and  about  0*5  of  an  inch  wide  and  thick, 
was  suspended  centrally  between  the  magnetic  poles  (2247-)^  and 
left  until  the  effect  of  torsion  was  over.  The  magnet  was  then 
thrown  into  action  by  making  contact  at  the  voltaic  batteiy: 
immediately  the  bar  moved,  turning  round  its  point  of  suspen- 


Dec.  1845.]     Action  of  magnets  on  heavy  glass. 


81 


sion,  into  a  position  across  the  magnetic  curve  or  line  of  force, 
and  after  a  few  vibrations  took  up  its  place  of  rest  there.  On 
being  displaced  by  hand  from  this  position,  it  returned  to  it, 
and  this  occurred  many  times  in  succession. 

2254.  Either  end  of  the  bar  indifferently  went  to  either  side 
of  the  axial  line.  The  determining  circumstance  was  simply  in- 
clination of  the  bar  one  way  or  the  other  to  the  axial  line,  at  the 
beginning  of  the  experiment.  If  a  particular  or  marked  end  of 
the  bar  were  on  one  side  of  the  magnetic,  or  axial  line,  when 
the  magnet  was  rendered  active  that  end  went  further  outwards, 
until  the  bar  had  taken  up  the  equatorial  position. 

2255.  Neither  did  any  change  in  the  magnetism  of  the  poles, 
by  change  in  the  direction  of  the  electric  current,  cause  any  dif- 
ference in  this  respect.  The  bar  went  by  the  shortest  course  to 
the  equatorial  position. 

2256.  The  power  which  urged  the  bar  into  this  position  was 
so  thoroughly  under  command,  that  if  the  bar  were  swinging  it 
could  easily  be  hastened  in  its  course  into  this  position,  or  ar- 
rested as  it  was  passing  from  it,  by  seasonable  contacts  at  the 
voltaic  battery. 

2257-  There  are  two  positions  of  equilibrium  for  the  bar;  one 
stable,  the  other  unstable.  When  in  the  direction  of  the  axis 
or  magnetic  line  of  force,  the  completion  of  the  electric  com- 
munication causes  no  change  of  place;  but  if  it  be  the  least 
oblique  to  this  position,  then  the  obliquity  increases  until  the 
bar  arrives  at  the  equatorial  position ;  or  if  the  bar  be  originally 
in  the  equatorial  position,  then  the  magnetism  causes  no  further 
changes,  but  retains  it  there  (2298.  2299.  2384.). 

2258.  Here  then  we  have  a  magnetic  bar  which  points  east 
and  west,  in  relation  to  north  and  south  poles,  i.  e.  points  per- 
pendicularly to  the  hnes  of  magnetic  force. 

2259.  If  the  bar  be  adjusted  so  that  its  point  of  suspension, 
being  in  the  axial  line,  is  not  equidistant  from  the  poles,  but 
near  to  one  of  them,  then  the  magnetism  again  makes  the  bar 
take  up  a  position  perpendicular  to  the  magnetic  lines  of  force; 
either  end  of  the  bar  being  on  the  one  side  of  the  axial  line,  or 
the  other,  at  pleasure.  But  at  the  same  time  there  is  another 
effect,  for  at  the  moment  of  completing  the  electric  contact,  the 
centre  of  gravity  of  the  bar  recedes  from  the  pole  and  remains 
repelled  from  it  as  long  as  the  magnet  is  retained  excited.  On 


32 


Action  of  magnets  on  heavy  glass.   [Series  XX. 


allowing  the  magnetism  to  pass  away,  the  bar  returns  to  the 
place  due  to  it  by  its  gravity. 

2260.  Precisely  the  same  effect  takes  place  at  the  other  pole 
of  the  magnet.  Either  of  them  is  able  to  repel  the  bar,  what- 
ever its  position  may  be,  and  at  the  same  time  the  bar  is  made 
to  assume  a  position,  at  right  angles,  to  the  line  of  magnetic  force. 

2261.  If  the  bar-  be  equidistant  from  the  two  poles,  and  in  the 
axial  line,  then  no  repulsive  effect  is  or  can  be  observed. 

2262.  But  preserving  the  point  of  suspension  in  the  equatorial 
line,  i.  e.  equidistant  from  the  two  poles,  and  removing  it  a  little 
on  one  side  or  the  other  of  the  axial  line  (2252.),  then  another 
effect  is  brought  forth.  The  bar  points  as  before  across  the 
magnetic  line  of  force,  but  at  the  same  time  it  recedes  from  the 
axial  line,  increasing  its  distance  from  it,  and  this  new  position 
is  retained  as  long  as  the  magnetism  continues,  and  is  quitted 
with  its  cessation. 

2263.  Instead  of  two  magnetic  poles,  a  single  pole  may  be 
used,  and  that  either  in  a  vertical  or  a  horizontal  position.  The 
effects  are  in  perfect  accordance  with  those  described  above;  for 
the  bar,  when  near  the  pole,  is  repelled  from  it  in  the  direction 
of  the  line  of  magnetic  force,  and  at  the  same  time  it  moves  into 
a  position  perpendicular  to  the  direction  of  the  magnetic  lines 
passing  through  it.  When  the  magnet  is  vertical  (2246.)  and 
the  bar  by  its  side,  this  action  makes  the  bar  a  tangent  to  the 
curve  of  its  surface. 

2264.  To  produce  these  effects,  of  pointing  across  the  mag- 
netic curves,  the  form  of  the  heavy  glass  must  be  long ;  a  cube, 
or  a  fragment  approaching  roundness  in  form,  will  not  point, 
but  a  long  piece  will.  Two  or  three  rounded  pieces  or  cubes, 
placed  side  by  side  in  a  paper  tray,  so  as  to  form  an  oblong  ac- 
cumulation, will  also  point. 

2265.  Portions,  however,  of  any  form,  are  repelled:  so  if  two 
pieces  be  hung  up  at  once  in  the  axial  Hne,  one  near  each  pole, 
they  are  repelled  by  their  respective  poles,  and  approach,  seeming 
to  attract  each  other.  Or  if  two  pieces  be  hung  up  in  the  equa- 
torial line,  one  on  each  side  of  the  axis,  then  they  both  recede 
from  the  axis,  seeming  to  repel  each  other. 

2266.  From  the  little  that  has  been  said,  it  is  evident  that  the 
bar  presents  in  its  motion  a  complicated  result  of  the  force  exerted 
by  the  magnetic  power  over  the  heavy  glass,  and  that,  when 


Dec.  1845.]    miction  of  magnets  on  heavy  glass.  33 

cubes  or  spheres  are  employed,  a  much  simpler  indication  of  the 
effect  may  be  obtained.  Accordingly,  when  a  cube  was  thus 
used  with  the  two  poles,  the  effect  was  repulsion  or  recession 
from  either  pole,  and  also  recession  from  the  magnetic  axis  on 
either  side. 

2267.  So,  the  indicating  particle  would  move,  either  along  the 
magnetic  curves,  or  across  them ;  and  it  would  do  this  either  in 
one  direction  or  the  other ;  the  only  constant  point  being,  that 
its  tendency  was  to  move  from  stronger  to  weaker  places  of 
magnetic  force. 

2268.  This  appeared  much  more  simply  in  the  case  of  a 
single  magnetic  pole,  for  then  the  tendency  of  the  indicating  cube 
or  sphere  was  to  move  outwards,  in  the  direction  of  the  mag- 
netic lines  of  force.  The  appearance  was  remarkably  like  a  case 
of  weak  electric  repulsion. 

2269.  The  cause  of  the  pointing  of  the  bar,  or  any  oblong  ar- 
rangement of  the  heavy  glass,  is  now  evident.  It  is  merely  a 
result  of  the  tendency  of  the  particles  to  move  outwards,  or  into 
the  positions  of  weakest  magnetic  action.  The  joint  exertion  of 
the  action  of  all  the  particles  brings  the  mass  into  the  position, 
which,  by  experiment,  is  found  to  belong  to  it. 

2270.  When  one  or  two  magnetic  poles  are  active  at  once, 
the  courses  desci'ibed  by  particles  of  heavy  glass  free  to  move, 
form  a  set  of  lines  or  curves,  which  I  may  have  occasion  here- 
after to  refer  to;  and  as  I  have  called  air,  glass,  water,  &c.  dia- 
magnetic  (2149.),  so  I  will  distinguish  these  lines  by  the  term 
diamagnetic  curves,  both  in  relation  to,  and  contradistinction 
from,  the  lines  called  magnetic  curves. 

2271.  When  the  bar  of  heavy  glass  is  immersed  in  water, 
alcohol,  or  aether,  contained  in  a  vessel  between  the  poles,  all 
the  preceding  effects  occur;  the  bar  points  and  the  cube  recedes 
exactly  in  the  same  manner  as  in  air. 

2272.  The  effects  equally  occur  in  vessels  of  wood,  stone,  earth, 
copper,  lead,  silver,  or  any  of  those  substances  which  belong  to 
the  diamagnetic  class  (2149.). 

2273.  I  have  obtained  the  same  equatorial  direction  and 
motions  of  the  heavy  glass  bar  as  those  just  desci-ibed,  but  in  a 
very  feeble  degree,  by  the  use  of  a  good  common  steel  horse-shoe 
magnet  (2157.).  I  have  not  obtained  them  by  the  use  of  the 
helices  (2191.  2192.)  without  the  iron  cores. 

VOL.  III.  n 


34 


Action  of  magnets  on 


[Series  XX. 


2274.  Here  therefore  we  have  magnetic  repulsion  without  po- 
larity, i.  e.  without  reference  to  a  particular  pole  of  the  magnet, 
for  either  pole  will  repel  the  substance,  and  both  poles  will  repel 
it  at  once  (2262.).  The  heavy  glass,  though  subject  to  magnetic 
action,  cannot  be  considered  as  magnetic,  in  the  usual  accepta- 
tion of  that  term,  or  as  iron,  nickel,  cobalt,  and  their  com- 
pounds. It  presents  to  us,  under  these  circumstances,  a  mag- 
netic property  new  to  our  knowledge ;  and  though  the  phaeno- 
mena  are  very  different  in  their  nature  and  character  to  those 
presented  by  the  action  of  the  heavy  glass  on  light  (2152.),  still 
they  appear  to  be  dependent  on,  or  connected  with,  the  same 
condition  of  the  glass  as  made  it  then  effective,  and  there- 
fore, with  those  pheenomena,  prove  the  reality  of  this  new  con- 
dition. 

^  iii.  Action  of  magnets  on  other  substances  acting  magnetically 

on  light. 

2275.  We  may  now  pass  from  heavy  glass  to  the  examination 
of  the  other  substances,  which,  when  under  the  power  of  mag- 
netic or  electric  forces,  are  able  to  affect  and  rotate  a  polarized 
ray  (2173.),  and  may  also  easily  extend  the  investigation  to 
bodies  which,  from  their  irregularity  of  form,  imperfect  trans- 
parency, or  actual  opacity,  could  not  be  examined  by  a  polarized 
ray,  for  here  we  have  no  difficulty  in  the  application  of  the  test 
to  all  such  substances. 

2276.  The  property  of  being  thus  repelled  and  affected  by 
magnetic  poles,  was  soon  found  not  to  be  peculiar  to  heavy 
glass.  Borate  of  lead,  flint-glass,  and  crown-glass  set  in  the 
same  manner  equatorially,  and  were  repelled  when  near  to  the 
poles,  though  not  to  the  same  degree  as  the  heavy  glass. 

2277-  Amongst  substances  which  could  not  be  subjected  to 
the  examination  by  light,  phosphorus  in  the  form  of  a  cylinder 
presented  the  phaenomena  very  well;  I  think  as  powerfully  as 
heavy  glass,  if  not  more  so.  A  cyhnder  of  sulphur,  and  a  long 
piece  of  thick  India  rubber,  neither  being  magnetic  after  the  or- 
dinary fashion,  were  well  directed  and  repelled. 

2278.  Crystalline  bodies  were  equally  obedient,  whether  taken 
from  the  single  or  double  refracting  class  (2237.)-  Prisms  of 
quartz,  calcareous  spar,  nitre  and  sulphate  of  soda,  all  pointed 
well,  and  were  repelled. 


Dec.  1845.]        diamagnetic  bodies  generally. 


35 


2279.  I  then  proceeded  to  subject  a  great  number  of  bodies, 
taken  from  every  class,  to  the  magnetic  forces,  and  will,  to  illus- 
trate the  variety  in  the  nature  of  the  substances,  give  a  com- 
paratively short  list  of  crystalline,  amorphous,  liquid  and  organic 
bodies  below.  When  the  bodies  were  fluids,  I  enclosed  them 
in  thin  glass  tubes.  Flint-glass  points  equatorially,  but  if  the 
tube  be  of  very  thin  glass,  this  effect  is  found  to  be  small  when 
the  tube  is  experimented  with  alone;  afterwards,  when  it  is  filled 
with  liquid  and  examined,  the  effect  is  such  that  there  is  no  fear 
of  mistaking  that  due  to 
the  glass  for  that  of  the 
fluid.  The  tubes  must 
not  be  closed  with  cork, 
sealing-wax,  or  any  ordi- 
nary substance  taken  at 
random,  for  these  are  generally  magnetic  (2285.) .  I  have  usually 
so  shaped  them  in  the  making,  and  drawn  them  off  at  the  neck, 
as  to  leave  the  aperture  on  one  side,  so  that  when  filled  with 
liquid  they  require  no  closing. 


Rock  crystal. 

1  Water. 

Sulphate  of  lime. 

Alcohol. 

Sulphate  of  baryta. 

^ther. 

Sulphate  of  soda. 

Nitric  acid. 

Sulphate  of  potassa. 

Sulphuric  acid. 

Sulphate  of  magnesia. 

Muriatic  acid. 

Alum. 

Solutions  of  various  alka- 

Muriate of  ammonia. 

line  and  earthy  salts. 

Chloride  of  lead. 

Glass. 

Chloride  of  sodium. 

Litharge. 

Nitrate  of  potassa. 

White  arsenic. 

Nitrate  of  lead. 

Iodine. 

Carbonate  of  soda. 

Phosphorus. 

Iceland  spar. 

Sulphur. 

Acetate  of  lead. 

Resin. 

Tartrate  of  potash  and 

Spermaceti.] 

antimony. 

Caffeine. 

Tartrate  of  potash  and 

Cinchonia. 

soda. 

Margaric  acid. 

Tartaric  acid. 

Wax  from  shell- lac. 

Citric  acid. 

Sealing-wax. 

D  2 


36 


Action  of  ma  (/nets  on  [Series  XX. 


Olive  oil. 


Mutton,  dried. 


Beef,  fresh. 
Beef,  dried. 
Blood,  fresh. 
Blood,  dried. 
Leather. 
Apple. 
Bread. 


Oil  of  turpentine. 
Jet. 

Caoutchouc. 
Sugar. 
Starch. 
Gum-arabic. 
Wood. 
Ivory. 

2281.  It  is  curious  to  see  such  a  list  as  this  of  bodies  present- 
ing on  a  sudden  this  remarkable  property,  and  it  is  strange  to 
find  a  piece  of  wood,  or  beef,  or  apple,  obedient  to  or  repelled 
by  a  magnet.  If  a  man  could  be  suspended,  with  sufficient 
delicacy,  after  the  manner  of  Dufay,  and  placed  in  the  magnetic 
field,  he  would  point  equatorially ;  for  all  the  substances  of  which 
he  is  formed,  including  the  blood,  possess  this  property. 

2282.  The  setting  equatorially  depends  upon  the  form  of  the 
body,  and  the  diversity  of  form  presented  by  the  different  sub- 
stances in  the  list  was  very  great ;  still  the  general  result,  that 
elongation  in  one  direction  was  sufficient  to  make  them  take  up 
an  equatorial  position,  was  established.  It  was  not  difficult  to 
perceive  that  comparatively  large  masses  would  point  as  readily 
as  small  ones,  because  in  larger  masses  more  lines  of  magnetic 
force  would  bear  in  their  action  on  the  body,  and  this  was  proved 
to  be  the  case.  Neither  was  it  long  before  it  evidently  appeared 
that  the  form  of  a  plate  or  a  ring  was  quite  as  good  as  that  of  a 
cylinder  or  a  prism ;  and  in  practice  it  was  found  that  plates 
and  flat  rings  of  wood,  spermaceti,  sulphur,  &c.,  if  suspended  in 
the  right  direction,  took  up  the  equatorial  position  very  well. 
If  a  plate  or  ring  of  heavy  glass  could  be  floated  in  water,  so  as 
to  be  free  to  move  in  every  direction,  and  were  in  that  condition 
subject  to  magnetic  forces  diminishing  in  intensity,  it  would  im- 
mediately set  itself  equatorially,  and  if  its  centre  coincided  with 
the  axis  of  magnetic  power,  would  remain  there ;  but  if  its 
centre  were  out  of  this  line,  it  would  then,  perhaps,  gradually 
pass  off  from  this  axis  in  the  plane  of  the  equator,  and  go  out 
from  between  the  poles. 

2283.  I  do  not  find  that  division  of  the  substance  has  any 
distinct  influence  on  the  effects.  A  piece  of  Iceland  spar  was 
observed,  as  to  the  degree  of  force  with  which  it  set  equatorially; 


Dec.  1845.] 


diamagnetic  bodies  generally. 


37 


it  was  then  broken  into  six  or  eight  fragments,  put  into  a  glass 
tube  and  tried  again;  as  well  as  I  could  ascertain,  the  effect  was 
the  same.  By  a  second  operation,  the  calcareous  spar  was  re- 
duced into  coarse  particles ;  afterwards  to  a  coarse  powder,  and 
ultimately  to  a  fine  powder :  being  examined  as  to  the  equa- 
torial set  each  time,  1  could  perceive  no  difference  in  the  effect, 
until  the  very  last,  when  I  thought  there  might  be  a  slight 
diminution  of  the  tendency  ;  but  if  so,  it  was  almost  insensible. 
.1  made  the  same  experiment  on  silica  with  the  same  result,  of 
no  diminution  of  power.  In  refei'ence  to  this  point  I  may  observe, 
that  starch  and  other  bodies  in  fine  powder  exhibited  the  effect 
very  well. 

2284.  It  would  require  very  nice  experiments  and  great  care 
to  ascertain  the  specific  degree  of  this  power  of  magnetic  action 
possessed  by  different  bodies,  and  I  have  made  very  little  pro- 
gress in  that  part  of  the  subject.  Heavy  glass  stands  above 
flint-glass,  and  the  latter  above  plate-glass.  Water  is  beneath 
all  these,  and  I  think  alcohol  is  below  water,  and  aether  below 
alcohol.  The  borate  of  lead  is  I  think  as  high  as  heavy  glass, 
if  not  above  it,  and  phosphorus  is  probably  at  the  head  of  all 
the  substances  just  named.  I  verified  the  equatorial  set  of 
phosphorus  between  the  poles  of  a  common  magnet  (2273.). 

2285.  I  was  much  impressed  by  the  fact  that  blood  was  not 
magnetic  (2280.),  nor  any  of  the  specimens  tried  of  red  muscular 
fibre  of  beef  or  mutton.  This  was  the  more  striking,  because, 
as  will  be  seen  hereafter,  iron  is  always  and  in  almost  all  states 
magnetic.  But  in  respect  to  this  point  it  may  be  observed, 
that  the  ordinary  magnetic  property  of  matter  and  this  new  pro- 
perty are  in  their  effects  opposed  to  each  other ;  and  that  when 
this  property  is  strong  it  may  overcome  a  very  shght  degree  of 
ordinary  magnetic  force,  just  as  also  a  certain  amount  of  the 
magnetic  property  may  oppose  and  effectually  hide  the  presence 
of  this  force  (2422.).  It  is  this  circumstance  which  makes  it  so 
necessary  to  be  careful  in  examining  the  magnetic  condition  of 
the  bodies  in  the  first  instance  (2250.).  The  following  hst  of 
a  few  substances  which  were  found  slightly  magnetic,  will 
illustrate  this  point :— Paper,  sealing-wax,  china  ink,  Berlin 
porcelain,  silkworm-gut,  asbestos,  fluor-spar,  red  lead,  vermi- 
hon  peroxide  of  lead,  sulphate  of  zinc,  tourmaline,  plumbago, 
fchell-lac,  charcoal.    In  some  of  these  cases  the  magnetism  was 


38 


Action  of  magyiets  on 


[Seuji£s  XX. 


generally  diffused  through  the  body,  in  other  cases  it  was  limited 
to  a  particular  part. 

2286.  Having  arrived  at  this  point,  I  may  observe,  that  we 
can  now  have  no  difficulty  in  admitting  that  the  phaenomena 
abundantly  establish  the  existence  of  a  magnetic  property  in 
matter,  new  to  our  knowledge.  Not  the  least  interesting  of  the 
consequences  that  flow  from  it,  is  the  manner  in  which  it  dis- 
poses of  the  assertion  which  has  sometimes  been  made,  that 
all  bodies  are  magnetic.  Those  who  hold  this  view,  mean  that 
all  bodies  are  magnetic  as  iron  is,  and  say  that  they  point  be- 
tween the  poles.  The  new  facts  give  not  a  mere  negative  to 
this  statement,  but  something  beyond,  namely,  an  affirmative  as 
to  the  existence  of  forces  in  all  ordinary  bodies,  directly  the  op- 
posite of  those  existing  in  magnetic  bodies,  for  whereas  those 
practically  produce  attraction,  these  produce  repulsion;  those 
set  a  body  in  the  axial  direction,  but  these  make  it  take  up  an 
equatorial  position :  and  the  facts,  with  regard  to  bodies  gene- 
rally, are  exactly  the  reverse  of  those  which  the  view  quoted  in- 
dicates. 

T[  iv.  Action  of  magnets  on  metals  generally. 

2287«  The  metals,  as  a  class,  stand  amongst  bodies  having  a 
high  and  distinct  interest  in  relation  both  to  magnetic  and  elec- 
tric forces,  and  might  at  first  well  be  expected  to  present  some 
peculiar  phaenomena,  in  relation  to  the  striking  property  found 
to  be  possessed  in  common  by  so  large  a  number  of  substances, 
so  varied  in  their  general  characters.  As  yet  no  distinction 
associated  with  conduction  or  non-conduction,  transparent  or 
opake,  solid  or  liquid,  crystalline  or  amorphous,  w'hole  or  broken, 
has  presented  itself ;  whether  the  metals,  distinct  as  they  are  as 
a  class,  would  fall  into  the  great  generalization,  or  whether  at  last 
a  separation  would  occur,  was  to  me  a  point  of  the  highest  in- 
terest. 

2288.  That  the  metals,  iron,  nickel  and  cobalt,  would  stand 
in  a  distinct  class,  appeared  almost  undoubted ;  and  it  will  be,  I 
think,  for  the  advantage  of  the  inquiry,  that  I  should  consider 
them  in  a  section  apart  by  themselves.  Further,  if  any  other 
metals  appeared  to  be  magnetic,  as  these  are,  it  would  be  right 
and  expedient  to  include  them  in  the  same  class. 

2289.  My  first  point,  therefore,  was  to  examine  the  metals 


Dec.  1845.]        diamagnetic  metals  generally. 


39 


for  any  indication  of  ordinary  magnetism.  Such  an  examina- 
tion cannot  be  carried  on  by  magnets  anything  short  in  power 
of  those  to  be  used  in  the  further  investigation ;  and  in  proof  of 
this  point  I  found  many  specimens  of  the  metals,  which  ap- 
peared to  be  perfectly  free  from  magnetism  when  in  the  presence 
of  a  magnetic  needle,  or  a  strong  horse-shoe  magnet  (2157.)j 
that  yet  gave  abundant  indications  when  suspended  near  to  one 
or  both  poles  of  the  magnets  described  (2246.). 

2290.  Mj^est  of  magnetism  was  this.  If  a  bar  of  the  metal 
to  be  examitred,  about  2  inches  long,  was  suspended  (2249.)  in 
the  magnetic  field,  and  being  at  first  oblique  to  the  axial  line 
was  upon  the  supervention  of  the  magnetic  forces  drawn  into 
the  axial  position  instead  of  being  driven  into  the  equatorial 
line,  or  remaining  in  some  oblique  direction,  then  I  considered 
it  magnetic.  Or,  if  being  near  one  magnetic  pole,  it  was  at- 
tracted by  the  pole,  instead  of  being  repelled,  then  I  concluded 
it  was  magnetic.  It  is  evident  that  the  test  is  not  strict,  because, 
as  before  pointed  out  (2285.),  a  body  may  have  a  shght  degree 
of  magnetic  force,  and  yet  the  power  of  the  new  property  be  so 
great  as  to  neutralize  or  surpass  it.  In  the  first  case,  it  might 
seem  neither  to  have  the  one  property  nor  the  other;  in  the 
second  case,  it  might  appear  free  from  magnetism,  and  possess- 

^  ing  the  special  property  in  a  small  degree. 

2291.  I  obtained  the  following  metals,  so  that  when  examined 
as  above,  they  did  not  appear  to  be  magnetic ;  and  in  fact,  if 
magnetic,  were  so  to  an  amount  so  small  as  not  to  destroy  the 
results  of  the  other  force,  or  to  stop  the  progress  of  the  inquiry. 


Antimony. 

Bismuth. 

Cadmium. 

Copper. 

Gold. 


Lead 

Mercury. 

Silver. 

Tin. 

Zinc. 


2292.  The  following  metals  were,  and  are  as  yet  to  me,  mag- 
netic, and  therefore  companions  of  iron,  nickel  and  cobalt : — 

Platinum.  Titanium. 
^  Palladium. 

2293.  Whether  all  these  metals  are  magnetic,  in  consequence 
of  the  presence  of  a  little  iron,  nickel,  or  cobalt  in  them,  or 
whether  any  of  them  are  really  so  of  themselves,  I  do  not  under- 
take to  decide  at  present ;  nor  do  I  mean  to  say  that  the  metals 


40 


Action  of  magnets  on  metals.      [Series  XX. 


of  the  former  list  are  free.  I  have  been  much  struck  by  the 
apparent  freedom  from  iron  of  almost  all  the  specimens  of  zinc, 
copper,  antimony  and  bismuth,  which  I  have  examined ;  and  it 
appears  to  me  very  likely  that  some  metals,  as  arsenic,  &c.,  may 
have  much  power  in  quelling  and  suppressing  the  magnetic 
properties  of  any  portion  of  iron  in  them,  whilst  other  metals, 
as  silver  or  platinum,  may  have  little  or  no  power  in  this  respect. 

2294.  Resuming  the  consideration  of  the  influence  exerted  by 
the  magnetic  force  over  those  metals  which  are  not  magnetic 
after  the  manner  of  iron  (2291.),  I  may  state  that  there  are  two 
sets  of  effects  produced  which  require  to  be  carefully  distin- 
guished. One  of  these  depends  upon  induced  magneto-electric 
currents,  and  shall  be  resumed  hereafter  (2309.).  The  other  in- 
cludes effects  of  the  same  nature  as  those  produced  with  heavy 
glass  and  many  other  bodies  (2276.). 

2295.  All  the  non-magnetic  metals  are  subject  to  the  mag- 
netic power,  and  produce  the  same  general  effects  as  the  large 
class  of  bodies  already  described.  The  force  which  they  then 
manifest,  they  possess  in  different  degrees.  Antimony  and  bis- 
muth show  it  well,  and  bismuth  appears  to  be  especially  fitted 
for  the  purpose.  It  excels  heavy  glass,  or  borate  of  lead,  and 
perhaps  phosphorus ;  and  a  small  bar  or  cylinder  of  it  about  2 
inches  long,  and  from  0*25  to  0*5  of  an  inch  in  width,  is  as  well 
fitted  to  show  the  various  peculiar  phaanomena  as  anything  I 
have  yet  submitted  to  examination. 

2296.  To  speak  accurately,  the  bismuth  bar  which  I  employed 
was  2  inches  long,  0*33  of  an  inch  wide,  and  0*2  of  an  inch 
thick.  When  this  bar  was  suspended  in  the  magnetic  field,  be- 
tween the  two  poles,  and  subject  to  the  magnetic  force,  it  pointed 
freely  in  the  equatorial  direction,  as  the  heavy  glass  did  (2253.), 
and  if  disturbed  from  that  position,  returned  freely  to  it.  This 
latter  point,  though  perfectly  m  accordance  with  the  former 
phasnomena,  is  in  such  striking  contrast  with  the  phasnomena 
presented  by  copper  and  some  other  of  the  metals  (2309.),  as  to 
require  particular  notice  here. 

2297-  The  comparative  sensibility  of  bismuth  causes  several 
movements  to  take  place  under  various  circumstances,  which 
being  complicated  in  their  nature,  require  careful  analysis  and 
explanation.  The  chief  of  these,  with  their  causes,  I  will  pro- 
ceed to  point  out. 


Dec.  1845.]      Bismuth,  as  a  diamagnetic  body.  41 

2298.  If  the  cylinder  electro-magnet  (2246.)  be  placed  ver- 
tically so  as  to  present  one  pole  upwards,  that  pole  will  exist  in 
the  upper  end  of  an  iron  cylinder,  having  a  flat  horizontal  face 
2h  inches  in  diameter.  A  small  indicating  sphere  (2266.)  of 
bismuth,  hung  over  the  centre  of  this  face  and  close  to  it,  does 
not  move  by  the  magnetism.  If  the  ball  be  carried  outwards, 
half-way,  for  instance,  between  the  centre  and  the  edge,  the 
magnetism  makes  it  move  inwards,  or  towards  the  axis  (pro- 
longed) of^e  iron  cylinder.  If  carried  still  further  outwards, 
it  still  moVes  inwards  under  the  influence  of  the  magnetism,  and 
such  continues  to  be  the  case  until  it  is  placed  just  over  the 
edge  of  the  terminal  face  of  the  core,  where  it  has  no  motion  at 
all  (here,  by  another  arrangement  of  the  experiment,  it  is  known 
to  tend  in  what  is  at  present  an  upward  direction  from  the  core). 
If  carried  a  little  further  outwards,  the  magnetism  then  makes 
the  bismuth  ball  tend  to  go  outwards  or  be  repelled,  and  such 
continues  to  be  the  direction  of  the  force  in  any  further  position, 
or  down  the  side  of  the  end  of  the  core. 

2299.  In  fact,  the  circular  edge  formed  by  the  intersection  of 
the  end  of  the  core  with  its  sides,  is  virtually  the  apex  of  the 
magnetic  pole,  to  a  body  placed  like  the  bismuth  ball  close  to  it, 
and  it  is  because  the  lines  of  magnetic  force  issuing  from  it 
diverge  as  it  were,  and  weaken  rapidly  in  all  directions  from  it, 
that  the  ball  also  tends  to  pass  in  all  directions  either  inwards 
or  upwards,  or  outwards  from  it,  and  thus  produces  the  motions 
described.  These  same  effects  do  not  in  fact  all  occur  when  the 
ball,  being  taken  to  a  greater  distance  from  the  iron,  is  placed 
in  magnetic  curves,  having  generally  a  simpler  direction.  In 
order  to  remove  the  effect  of  the  edge,  an  iron  cone  was  placed 
on  the  top  of  the  core,  converting  the  flat  end  into  a  cone,  and 
then  the  indicating  ball  was  urged  to  move  upwards,  only  when 
over  the  apex  of  the  cone,  and  upwards  and  outwards,  as  it  Vi  as 
more^or  less  on  one  side  of  it,  being  always  repelled  from  the 
pole  in  that  direction,  which  transferred  it  most  rapidly  from 
strong  to  weaker  points  of  magnetic  force. 

2300.  To  return  to  the  vertical  flat  pole :  when  a  horizontal 
bar  of  bismuth  was  suspended  concentrically  and  close  to  the 
pole,  it  could  take  up  a  position  in  any  direction  relative  to  the 
axis  of  the  pole,  having  at  the  same  time  a  tendency  to  move 
upwards  or  be  repelled  from  it.    If  its  point  of  suspension  was 


42 


Bismuth,  as  a  diamaynetic  metal.     [Series  XX. 


a  little  excentric,  the  bar  gradually  turned,  until  it  was  parallel 
to  a  line  joining  its  point  of  suspension  with  the  prolonged 
axis  of  the  pole,  and  the  centre  of  gravity  moved  inwards. 
When  its  point  of  suspension  was  just  outside  the  edge  of  the 
flat  circular  terminating  face,  and  the  bar  formed  a  certain  angle 
with  a  radial  line  joining  the  axis  of  the  core  and  the  point  of 
suspension,  then  the  movements  of  the  bar  were  uncertain  and 
wavering.  If  the  angle  with  the  radial  line  were  less  than  that 
above,  the  bar  would  move  into  parallelism  with  the  radius  and 
go  inwards:  if  the  angle  were  greater,  the  bar  would  move  until 
perpendicular  to  the  radial  line  and  go  outwards.  If  the  centre 
of  the  bar  M'ere  still  further  out  than  in  the  last  case,  or  down 
by  the  side  of  the  core,  the  bar  would  always  place  itself  per- 
pendicular to  the  radius  and  go  outwards.  All  these  compli- 
cations of  motion  are  easily  resolved  into  their  simple  ele- 
mentary origin,  if  reference  be  had  to  the  character  of  the  cir- 
cular angle  bounding  the  end  of  the  core;  to  the  direction  of 
the  magnetic  lines  of  force  issuing  from  it  and  the  other  parts  of 
the  pole;  to  the  position  of  the  different  parts  of  the  bar  in  these 
lines ;  and  the  ruling  principle  that  each  particle  tends  to  go  by 
the  nearest  course  from  strong  to  weaker  points  of  magnetic  force. 

2301.  The  bismuth  points  well,  and  is  well  repelled  (229G.) 
when  immersed  in  water,  alcohol,  ajther^  oil,  mercury,  &c.,  and 
also  when  enclosed  within  vessels  of  earth,  glass,  copper,  lead,  &c. 
(2272.),  or  when  screens  of  075  or  1  inch  in  thickness  of  bis- 
muth, copper,  or  lead  intervene.  Even  when  a  bismuth  cube 
(2266.)  was  placed  in  an  iron  vessel  2\  inches  in  diameter  and 
0-17  of  an  inch  in  thickness,  it  was  well  and  freely  repelled  by 
the  magnetic  pole. 

2302.  Whether  the  bismuth  be  in  one  piece  or  in  very  fine 
powder,  appears  to  make  no  difference  in  the  character  or  in  the 
degree  of  its  magnetic  property  (2283.). 

2303.  I  made  many  experiments  with  masses  and  bars  of 
bismuth  suspended,  or  otherwise  circumstanced,  to  ascertain 
whether  two  pieces  had  any  mutual  action  on  each  other,  either 
of  attraction  or  repulsion,  whilst  jointly  under  the  influence  of 
the  magnetic  forces,  but  I  could  not  find  any  indication  of  such 
mutual  action :  they  appeared  to  be  perfectly  indifierent  one  to 
another,  each  tending  only  to  go  from  stronger  to  weaker  points 
of  magnetic  power. 


Dec.  1845.]       Diamagnetic  metals  generally. 


43 


2304.  Bismuth,  in  very  fine  powder,  was  sprinkled  upon  paper, 
laid  over  the  hoi'izontal  circular  termination  of  the  vertical  pole 
(2246.).  If  the  paper  were  tapped,  the  magnet  not  being  excited, 
nothing  particular  occurred ;  but  if  the  magnetic  power  were  on, 
then  the  powder  retreated  in  both  directions,  inwards  and  out- 
wards, from  a  circular  line  just  over  the  edge  of  the  core, 
leaving  the  circle  clear,  and  at  the  same  time  showing  the  ten- 
dencv  of  the  particles  of  bismuth  in  all  directions  from  that  line 
(2299.). 

2305.  When  the  pole  was  terminated  by  a  cone  (2246.)  and 
the  magnet  not  in  action,  paper  with  bismuth  powder  sprinkled 
over  it  being  drawn  over  the  point  of  the  cone,  gave  no  parti- 
cular result ;  but  when  the  magnetism  was  on,  such  an  opera- 
tion cleared  the  powder  from  every  point  vrhich  came  over  the 
cone,  so  that  a  mark  was  traced  or  wi'itten  out  in  clear  lines 
running  through  the  powder,  and  showing  every  place  where 
the  pole  had  passed. 

2306.  The  bar  of  bismuth  and  a  bar  of  antimony  was  found 
to  set  equatorially  between  the  poles  of  the  ordinary  horse-shoe 
magnet. 

2307.  The  following  hst  may  serve  to  give  an  idea  of  the  ap- 
parent order  of  some  metals,  as  regards  their  power  of  producing 
these  new  effects,  but  I  cannot  be  sure  that  they  are  perfectly 
free  from  the  magnetic  metals.  In  addition  to  that,  there  are 
certain  other  effects  produced  by  the  action  of  magnetism  on 
metals  (2309.)  which  greatly  interfere  with  the  results  due  to 
the  present  property. 

Bismuth.  Cadmium. 
Antimony.  Mercury. 
Zinc.  Silver. 
Tin.  Copper. 

2308.  I  have  a  vague  impression  that  the  repulsion  of  bismuth 
by  a  magnet  has  been  observed  and  published  several  years  ago. 
If  so,  it  will  appear  that  what  must  then  have  been  considered 
as  a  peculiar  and  isolated  effect,  was  the  consequence  of  a  gene- 
ral property,  which  is  now  shown  to  belong  to  all  matter  ^ 


'  M.  de  la  Rive  has  this  day  referred  me  to  the  Bibliotheque  Universelle  for 
1829,  tome  xl.  p.  82,  where  it  will  be  found  that  the  experiment  spoken  of 
above  is  duetoM.  la  Baillif  of  Paris.  M.  la  Baillif  showed  sixteen  years  ago  that 


44 


Revulsive  action  of  magnets     [Series  XX. 


2309.  I  now  turn  to  the  consideration  of  some  peculiar  phae- 
nomena  which  are  presented  by  copper  and  several  of  the  metals 
when  they  are  subjected  to  the  action  of  magnetic  forces,  and 
which  so  tend  to  mask  effects  of  the  kind  already  described,  that 
if  not  known  to  the  inquirer  they  would  lead  to  much  confusion 
and  doubt.  These  I  will  first  describe  as  to  their  appearances, 
and  then  proceed  to  consider  their  origin. 

2310.  If  instead  of  a  bar  of  bismuth  (2296.)  a  bar  of  copper  of 
the  same  size  be  suspended  between  the  poles  (2247.),  and 
magnetic  power  be  developed  whilst  the  bar  is  in  a  position 
obhque  to  the  axial  and  equatorial  Hues,  the  experimenter  will 
perceive  the  bar  to  be  affected,  but  this  will  not  be  manifest  by 
any  tendency  of  the  bar  to  go  to  the  equatorial  line ;  on  the 
contrary,  it  will  advance  towards  the  axial  position  as  if  it  were 
magnetic.  It  will  not,  however,  continue  its  course  until  in  that 
position,  but,  unlike  any  effect  produced  by  magnetism,  will 
stop  short,  and  making  no  vibration  beyond  or  about  a  given 
point,  will  remain  there  coming  at  once  to  a  dead  rest:  and 
this  it  will  do  even  though  the  bar  by  the  effect  of  torsion  or 
momentum  was  previously  moving  with  a  force  that  would  have 
caused  it  to  make  several  gyrations.  This  effect  is  in  striking 
contrast  with  that  which  occurs  when  antimony,  bismuth,  heavy 
glass,  or  other  such  bodies  are  employed,  and  it  is  equally  re- 
moved from  an  ordinary  magnetic  effect. 

2311.  The  position  which  the  bar  has  taken  up  it  retains  with 
a  considerable  degree  of  tenacity,  provided  the  magnetic  force 
be  continued.  If  pushed  out  of  it,  it  does  not  return  into  it, 
but  takes  up  its  new  position  in  the  same  manner,  and  holds  it 
with  the  same  stiffness ;  a  push,  hoM^ever,  which  would  make 
the  bar  spin  round  several  times  if  no  magnetism  were  present, 
will  now  not  move  it  through  more  than  20°  or  30°.  This  is 
not  the  case  with  bismuth  or  heavy  glass;  they  vibrate  freely  in 
the  magnetic  field,  and  always  return  to  the  equatorial  position. 

both  bismuth  and  antimony  repelled  the  magnetic  needle.  It  is  astonishing 
that  such  an  experiment  has  remained  so  long  without  further  resylts.  I  re- 
joice that  I  am  able  to  insert  this  reference  before  the  present  series  of  these 
Researches  goes  to  press.  Those  who  read  ray  papers  will  see  here,  as  on  many 
other  occasions,  the  results  of  a  memory  which  becomes  continually  weaker  ; 
I  only  hope  that  they  will  be  excused,  and  that  omissions  and  errors  of  that 
nature  will  be  considered  as  involuntary.  -  M.  F.    Dec.  30,  1845. 


Dec.  1845.]       on  copper  and  good  conduciors. 


45 


2312.  The  position  taken  up  by  the  bar  may  be  any  position. 
The  bar  is  moved  a  little  at  the  instant  of  superinducing  the 
magnetism,  but  allowing  and  providing  for  that,  it  may  be  finally 
fixed  in  any  position  required.  Even  when  swinging  with  con- 
siderable power  by  torsion  or  momentum,  it  may  be  caught  and 
retained  in  any  place  the  experimenter  wishes. 

2.313.  There  are  two  positions  in  which  the  bar  may  be  placed 
at  the  beginnhig  of  the  experiment,  from  which  the  magnetism 
does  not  move  it,  the  equatorial  and  the  axial  positions.  When 
the  bar  is  nearly  midway  between  these,  it  is  usually  most 
strongly  affected  by  the  first  action  of  the  magnet,  but  the  posi- 
tion of  most  efiect  varies  with  the  form  and  dimensions  of  the 
magnetic  poles  and  of  the  bar. 

2314.  If  the  centre  of  suspension  of  the  bar  be  in  the  axial 
line,  but  near  to  one  of  the  poles,  these  movements  occur  well, 
and  are  clear  and  distinct  in  their  direction :  if  it  be  in  the  equa- 
torial line,  but  on  one  side  of  the  axial  line,  they  are  modified, 
but  in  a  manner  which  will  easily  be  understood  hereafter. 

2315.  Having  thus  stated  the  effect  of  the  supervention  of 
the  magnetic  force,  let  us  now  remark  what  occurs  at  the  mo- 
ment of  its  cessation;  for  during  its  continuance  there  is  no 
change.  If,  then,  after  the  magnetism  has  been  sustained  for 
two  or  three  seconds,  the  electric  current  be  stopped,  there  is 
instantly  a  strong  action  on  the  bar,  which  has  the  appearance 
of  a  revulsion  (for  the  bar  returns  upon  the  course  which  it  took 
for  a  moment  when  the  electric  contact  was  made),  but  with 
such  force,  that  whereas  the  advance  might  be  perhaps  15°  or 
20°,  the  revulsion  will  cause  the  bar  occasionally  to  move 
through  two  or  three  revolutions. 

2316.  Heavy  glass  or  bismuth  presents  no  such  phaenomena 
as  this. 

2317.  If,  whilst  the  bar  is  revolving  from  revulsion  the  elec- 
tric current  at  the  magnet  be  renewed,  the  bar  instantly  stops 
with  the  former  appearances  and  results  (2310.),  and  then  upon 
removing  the  magnetic  force  is  affected  again,  and,  of  course, 
now  in  a  contrary  direction  to  the  former  revulsion. 

2318.  When  the  bar  is  caught  by  the  magnetic  force  in  the 
axial  or  equatorial  position,  there  is  no  revulsion.  When  in- 
clined to  these  positions,  there  is ;  and  the  places  most  powerful 
in  this  respect  appear  to  be  those  most  favourable  to  the  first 


46 


Sluggish  action  of  copper,  ^c.      [Series  XX. 


brief  advance  (2313.).  If  the  bar  be  in  a  position  at  which 
strong  revulsion  would  occur,  and  whilst  the  magnetism  is  con- 
tinued be  moved  by  hand  into  the  equatorial  or  axial  position, 
then  on  taking  off  the  magnetic  force  there  is  no  revulsion. 

2319.  If  the  continuance  of  the  electric  current  and  conse- 
quently of  the  magnetism  be  for  a  moment  only,  the  revulsion 
is  very  little,  and  the  shorter  the  continuance  of  the  magnetic 
force  the  less  is  the  revulsion.  If  the  magnetic  force  be  con- 
tinued for  two  or  three  seconds  and  then  interrupted  and  instantly 
renewed,  the  bar  is  loosened  and  caught  again  by  the  power 
before  it  sensibly  changes  its  place;  and  now  it  may  be  observed 
that  it  does  not  advance  on  the  renewal  of  the  force  as  it  would 
have  done  had  it  been  acted  on  by  a  first  contact  in  that  place 
(2310.);  i.  e.  if  the  bar  be  in  a  certain  place  inclined  to  the  axial 
position,  the  first  supervention  of  the  magnetic  power  causes  it  to 
advance  towards  the  axial  position;  but  the  bar  being  in  the  same 
place  and  the  magnetic  power  suspended  and  instantly  renewed, 
the  second  supervention  of  force  does  not  move  the  bar  as  the 
first  did. 

2320.  When  the  copper  bar  is  immersed  in  water,  alcohol,  or 
even  mercury,  the  same  effects  take  place  as  in  the  air,  but  the 
movements  are,  of  course,  not  to  the  same  extent. 

2321.  When  plates  of  copper  or  bismuth,  an  inch  in  thickness, 
intervene  between  the  poles  and  the  copper  bar,  the  same  results 
occur. 

2322.  If  one  magnetic  pole  only  be  employed  the  effects 
occur  near  it  as  well  as  before,  provided  that  pole  have  a  face 
large  in  proportion  to  the  bar,  as  the  end  of  the  iron  core 
(2246.) :  but  if  the  pole  be  pointed  by  the  use  of  the  conical  ter- 
mination, or  if  the  bar  be  opposite  the  edge  of  the  end  of  the 
core,  then  they  become  greatly  enfeebled  or  disappear  altogether; 
and  only  the  general  fact  of  repulsion  remains  (2295.). 

2323.  The  peculiar  effects  which  have  just  been  described  are 
perhaps  more  strikingly  shown  if  the  bar  of  copper  be  suspended 
perpendicularly,  and  then  hung  opposite  and  near  to  the  large 
face  of  a  single  magnetic  pole,  or  the  pole  being  placed  verti- 
cally, as  described  (2246.  2263.),  anywhere  near  to  its  side.  The 
bar,  it  will  be  remembered,  is  2  inches  in  length  by  0-33  of  an 
inch  in  width,  and  0*2  of  an  inch  in  thickness,  and  as  it  now 
will  revolve  on  an  axis  parallel  to  its  length,  the  two  smaller  di- 


Dec.  1845.] 


in  the  magnetic  field. 


47 


mensions  are  those  which  are  free  to  move  into  new  positions. 
In  this  case  the  establishment  of  the  magnetic  force  causes  the 
bar  to  turn  a  Httle  in  accordance  with  the  effects  before  described, 
and  the  removal  of  the  magnetic  force  causes  a  revulsion,  which 
sends  the  bar  spinning  round  on  its  axis  several  times.  But  at 
any  moment  the  bar  can  again  be  caught  and  held  in  a  position 
as  before.  The  tendency  on  making  contact  at  the  battery  is  to 
place  the  longest  moving  dimension,  i.  e.  the  width  of  the  bar, 
parallel  to  the  line  joining  the  centre  of  action  of  the  magnet 
and  the  bar. 

2324.  The  bar,  as  before  (2311.),  is  extremely  sluggish  and 
as  if  immersed  in  a  dense  fluid,  as  respects  rotation  on  its  own 
axis  j  but  this  sluggishness  does  not  affect  the  bar  as  a  whole, 
for  any  pendulum  vibration  it  has,  continues  unaffected.  It  is 
very  curious  to  see  the  bar,  jointly  vibrating  from  its  point  of 
suspension  (2249.)  and  rotating  on  its  axis,  when  first  affected 
by  the  magnetic  force,  for  instantly  the  latter  motion  ceases,  but 
the  former  goes  on  with  undiminished  power. 

2325.  The  same  effect  of  sluggishness  occurs  with  a  cube  or 
a  globe  of  copper  as  with  the  bar,  but  the  phaenomena  of  the 
first  turn  and  the  revulsion  cease  (2310.  2315.). 

2326.  The  bars  of  bismuth  and  heavy  glass  present  no  ap- 
pearance of  this  kind.  The  peculiar  phasnoraena  produced  by 
copper  are  as  distinct  from  the  actions  of  these  substances  as 
they  are  from  ordinary  magnetic  actions. 

2327.  Endeavouring  to  explain  the  cause  of  these  effects,  it 
appears  to  me  that  they  depend  upon  the  excellent  conducting 
power  of  copper  for  electric  currents,  the  gradual  acquisition 
and  loss  of  magnetic  power  by  the  iron  core  of  the  electro-mag- 
net, and  the  production  of  those  induced  currents  of  magneto- 
electricity  which  I  described  in  the  First  Series  of  these  Experi- 
mental Researches  (55.  109.). 

2328.  The  obstruction  to  motion  on  its  own  axis,  when  the 
bar  is  subjected  to  the  magnetic  forces,  belongs  equally  to  the 
form  of  a  sphere  or  a  cube.  It  belongs  to  these  bodies,  how- 
ever, only  when  their  axes  of  rotation  are  perpendicular  or  oblique 
to  the  Hues  of  magnetic  force,  and  not  when  they  are  parallel  to 
It ;  for  the  horizontal  bar,  or  the.  vertical  bar,  or  the  cube  or 
sphere,  rotate  with  perfect  facility  when  they  are  suspended 
above  the  vertical  pole  (2246.),  the  rotation  and  vibration  being 


48 


Sluggish  action  of  copper,  6fc.      [Series  XX. 


then  equally  free,  and  the  same  as  the  corresponding  movements 
of  bismuth  or  heavy  glass.  The  obstruction  is  at  a  maximum 
when  the  axis  of  rotation  is  perpendicular  to  the  lines  of  mag- 
netic force,  and  when  the  bar  or  cube,  &c.  is  near  to  the 
magnet. 

2329.  Without  going  much  into  the  particular  circumstances, 
I  may  say  that  the  elFect  is  fully  explained  by  the  electric  cur- 
rents induced  in  the  copper  mass.  By  reference  to  the  Second 
Series  of  these  Researches  (160.)  ^  it  will  be  seen  that  when  a 
globe,  subject  to  the  action  of  Hues  of  magnetic  force,  is  revolving 
on  an  axis  perpendicular  to  these  hnes,  an  electric  current  runs 
round  it  in  a  plane  parallel  to  the  axis  of  rotation  and  to  the 
magnetic  lines,  producing  consequently  a  magnetic  axis  in  the 
globe,  at  right  angles  to  the  magnetic  curves  , of  the  inducing 
magnet.  The  magnetic  poles  of  this  axis  therefore  are  in  that 
direction  which,  in  conjunction  with  the  chief  magnetic  pole, 
tends  to  draw  the  globe  back  against  the  direction  in  which  it  is 
revolving.  Thus,  if  a  piece  of  copper  be  revolving  before  a  north 
magnetic  pole,  so  that  the  parts  nearest  the  pole  move  towards 
the  right-hand,  then  the  right-hand  side  of  that  copper  will  have 
a  south  magnetic  state,  and  the  left-hand  side  a  north  magnetic 
state ;  and  these  states  will  tend  to  counteract  the  motion  of  the 
copper  towards  the  right-hand  :  or  if  it  revolve  in  the  contrary 
direction,  then  the  right-hand  side  will  have  a  south  magnetic 
state,  and  the  left-hand  side  a  north  magnetic  state.  Which- 
ever way,  therefore,  the  copper  tends  to  revolve  on  its  own  axis, 
the  instant  it  moves,  a  power  is  evolved  in  such  a  direction  as 
tends  to  stop  its  motion  and  bring  it  to  rest.  Being  at  rest 
in  reference  to  this  direction  of  motion,  then  there  is  no  re- 
sidual or  other  effect  which  tends  to  disturb  it,  and  it  remains 
still. 

2330.  If  the  whole  mass  be  moving  parallel  to  itself,  and  be 
small  in  comparison  with  the  face  of  the  magnetic  pole  opposite 
to  which  it  is  placed,  then,  though  it  pass  through  the  magnetic 
lines  of  force,  and  consequently  have  a  tendency  to  the  forma- 
tion of  magneto-electric  currents  within  it,  yet  as  all  parts  move 
with  equal  velocity  and  in  the  same  direction  through  similar 
magnetic  lines  of  force,  the  tendency  to  the  formation  of  a  cur- 
rent is  the  same  in  every  part,  and  there  is  no  actual  production 

Philosophical  Transactions,  1832,  p.  1^8. 


Dec.  1845.]  in  the  magnetic  field.  id 

of  current,  and  consequently  nothing  occurs  which  can  in  any 
way  interfere  with  its  freedom  of  motion.  Hence  the  reason 
that  though  the  rotation  of  the  bar  or  cube  (2324.  2328.)  upon 
its  own  axis  is  stopped,  its  vibration  as  a  pendulum  is  not 
affected. 

2331.  That  neither  the  one  nor  the  other  motion  is  affected 
when  the  bar  or  cube  is  over  the  vertical  pole  (2328.),  is  simply 
because  in  both  cases  (with  the  given  dimensions  of  the  pole 
and  the  moving  metal)  the  lines  of  particles  through  which 
the  induced  currents  tend  to  move  are  parallel  throughout  the 
whole  mass ;  and  therefore,  as  there  is  no  part  by  which  the 
return  of  the  current  can  be  carried  on,  no  current  can  be 
formed. 

2332.  Before  proceeding  to  the  explanation  of  the  other  phe- 
nomena, it  will  be  necessary  to  point  out  the  fact  generally  un- 
derstood and  acknowledged,  I  believe,  that  time  is  required  for 
the  development  of  magnetism  in  an  iron  core  by  a  current 
of  electricity ;  and  also  for  its  fall  back  again  when  the  current 
is  stopped.  One  effect  of  the  gradual  rise  in  power  was  referred 
to  in  the  last  series  of  these  Researches  (2170.).  This  time  is 
probably  longer  with  iron  not  well  annealed  than  with  very  good 
and  perfectly  annealed  iron.  The  last  portions  of  magnetism 
which  a  given  current  can  develope  in  a  certain  core  of  iron,  are 
also  apparently  acquired  more  slowly  than  the  first  portions ; 
and  these  portions  (or  the  condition  of  iron  to  which  they  are 
due)  also  appear  to  be  lost  more  slowly  than  the  other  portions 
of  the  power.  If  electric  contact  be  made  for  an  instant  only, 
the  magnetism  developed  by  the  current  disappears  as  instantly 
on  the  breaking  of  the  current,  as  it  appeared  on  its  formation ; 
but  if  contact  be  continued  for  three  or  four  seconds,  breaking 
the  contact  is  by  no  means  accompanied  by  a  disappearance  of 
the  magnetism  with  equal  rapidity. 

2333.  In  order  to  trace  the  peculiar  effect  of  the  copper,  and 
its  cause,  let  us  consider  the  condition  of  the  horizontal  bar 
(2310.  2313.)  when  in  the  equatorial  position,  between  the  two 
magnetic  poles,  or  before  a  single  pole ;  the  point  of  suspension 
being  in  a  line  with  the  axis  of  the  pole  and  its  exciting  wire 
helix.  On  sending  an  electric  current  through  the  helix,  both 
It  and  the  magnet  it  produces  will  conduce  to  the  formation  of 
currents  in  the  copper  bar  in  the  contrary  direction.    This  is 

VOL.  in.  jj 


50 


Copper  and  good  conductors        [Series  XX. 


shown  from  ray  former  researches  (26.),  and  may  be  proved,  by 
placing  a  small  or  large  wire  helix-shaped  (if  it  be  desired)  in 
the  form  of  the  bar,  and  carrying  away  the  currents  produced  in 
it,  by  wires  to  a  galvanometer  at  a  distance.  Such  currents, 
being  produced  in  the  copper,  only  continue  whilst  the  magnet- 
ism of  the  core  is  rising,  and  then  cease  (18.  39.),  but  whilst  they 
continue,  they  give  a  virtual  magnetic  polarity  to  that  face  of 
the  copper  bar  which  is  opposite  to  a  certain  pole,  the  polarity 
being  the  same  in  kind  as  the  pole  it  faces.  Thus  on  the  side 
of  the  bar  facing  the  north  pole  of  the  magnet,  a  north  polarity 
will  be  developed ;  and  on  that  side  facing  the  south  pole,  a 
south  polarity  will  be  generated. 

2334.  It  is  easy  to  see  that  if  the  copper  during  this  time 
were  opposite  only  one  pole,  or  being  between  two  poles,  were 
nearer  to  one  than  the  other,  this  effect  would  cause  its  repul- 
sion. Still,  it  cannot  account  for  the  whole  amount  of  the  re- 
pulsion observed  alike  with  copper  as  with  bismuth  (2295.),  be- 
cause the  currents  are  of  but  momentary  duration,  and  the  re- 
pulsion due  to  them  would  cease  with  them.  They  do,  however, 
cause  a  brief  repulsive  effort,  to  which  is  chiefly  due  the  first 
part  of  the  peculiar  effect. 

2335.  For  if  the  copper  bar,  instead  of  being  parallel  to  the 
face  of  the  magnetic  pole,  and  therefore  at  right  angles  to  the 
resultant  of  magnetic  force,  be  inclined,  forming,  for  instance, 
an  angle  of  45°  with  the  face,  then  the  induced  currents  will 
move  generally  in  a  plane  corresponding  more  or  less  to  that 
angle,  nearly  as  they  do  in  the  examining  helix  (2333.),  if  it  be 
inclined  in  the  same  manner.  This  throws  the  polar  axis  of  the 
bar  of  copper  on  one  side,  so  that  the  north  polarity  is  not  di- 
rectly opposed  to  the  north  pole  of  the  inducing  magnet,  and 
hence  the  action  both  of  this  and  the  other  magnetic  pole  upon 
the  two  polarities  of  the  copper  will  be  to  send  it  further  round, 
or  to  place  it  edgeways  to  the  poles,  or  with  its  breadth  parallel 
to  the  magnetic  resultant  passing  through  it  (2323.) :  the  bar 
therefore  receives  an  impulse,  and  the  angle  of  it  nearest  to  the 
magnet  appears  to  be  pulled  up  towards  the  magnet.  This  ac- 
tion of  course  stops  the  instant  the  magnetism  of  the  helix  core 
ceases  to  rise,  and  then  the  motion  due  to  this  cause  ceases,  and 
the  copper  is  simply  subject  to  the  action  before  described 
(2295.).    At  the  same  time  that  this  twist  or  small  portion  of  a 


Dec.  1845.]  m  the  magnetic  field.  51 

tm-n  round  the  point  of  suspension  occurs,  the  centre  of  gravity 
of  the  whole  mass  is  repelled,  and  thus  I  believe  all  the  actions 
up  to  this  condition  of  things  is  accounted  for. 

2336.  Then  comes  the  revulsion  which  occurs  upon  the  cessa- 
tion of  the  electric  current,  and  the  falling  of  the  magnetism  in 
the  core.  According  to  the  law  of  magneto-electric  induction, 
the  disappearance  of  the  magnetic  force  will  induce  brief  currents 
in  the  copper  bar  (28.),  but  in  the  contrary  direction  to  those 
induced  in  the  first  instance ;  and  therefore  the  virtual  magnetic 
pole  belonging  to  the  copper  for  the  moment,  which  is  nearest 
the  north  end  of  the  electro-magnet,- will  be  a  south  pole;  and 
that  which  is  furthest  from  the  same  pole  of  the  magnet  will  be 
a  north  pole.  Hence  will  arise  an  exertion  of  force  on  the  bar 
tending  to  turn  it  round  its  centre  of  suspension  in  the  contrary 
direction  to  that  which  occurred  before,  and  hence  the  apparent 
revulsion  ;  for  the  angle  nearest  the  magnetic  pole  will  recede 
from  it,  the  broad  face  (2323.)  or  length  (2315.)  of  the  bar  will 
come  round  and  face  towards  the  magnet,  and  an  action  the  re- 
verse in  every  respect  of  the  first  action  will  take  place,  except 
that  whereas  the  motion  was  then  only  a  few  degrees,  now  it 
may  extend  to  two  or  three  revolutions. 

2337-  The  cause  of  this  difference  is  very  obvious.  In  the 
first  instance,  the  bar  of  copper  was  moving  under  influences 
powerfully  tending  to  retard  and  stop  it  (2329.) ;  in  the  second 
case  these  influences  are  gone,  and  the  bar  revolves  freely  with 
a  force  proportionate  to  the  power  exerted  by  the  magnet  upon 
the  currents  induced  by  its  own  action. 

2338.  Even  when  the  copper  is  of  such  form  as  not  to  give 
the  oblique  resultant  of  magnetic  action  from  the  currents  in- 
duced in  it,  when,  for  instance,  it  is  a  cube  or  a  sphere,  still  the 
effect  of  the  action  described  above  is  evident  (2325.).  When  a 
plate  of  copper  about  three-fourths  of  an  inch  in  thickness,  and 
weighing  two  pounds,  was  sustained  upon  some  loose  blocks  of 
wood  and  placed  about  0*  I  of  an  inch  from  the  face  of  the  mag- 
netic pole,  it  was  repelled  and  held  off  a  certain  distance  upon 
the  making  and  continuing  of  electric  contact  at  the  battery; 
and  when  the  battery  current  was  stopped,  it  returned  towards 
the  pole ;  but  the  return  was  much  more  powerful  than  that 
due  to  gravity  alone  (as  was  ascertained  by  an  experiment),  the 
plate  being  at  that  moment  actually  attracted,  as  well  as  tending 

E  2 


52 


Peculiar  action  on  good  conductors  [Series  XX. 


by  gravitation  towards  the  magnet,  so  that  it  gave  a  strong  tap 
against  it. 

2339.  Such  is,  I  believe,  the  explanation  of  the  peculiar  phae- 
nomena  presented  by  copper  in  the  magnetic  field;  and  the 
reason  why  they  appear  with  this  metal  and  not  with  bismuth 
or  heavy  glass,  is  almost  certainly  to  be  found  in  its  high  electro- 
conducting  power,  which  permits  the  formation  of  currents  in  it 
by  inductive  forces,  that  cannot  produce  the  same  in  a  corre- 
sponding degree  in  bismuth,  and  of  course  not  at  all  in  heavy 
glass. 

2340.  Any  ordinary  magnetism  due  to  metals  by  virtue  of 
their  inherent  power,  or  the  presence  of  small  portions  of  the 
magnetic  metals  in  them,  must  oppose  the  development  of  the 
results  I  have  been  describing ;  and  hence  metals  not  of  abso- 
lute purity  cannot  be  compared  with  each  other  in  this  respect. 
I  have,  nevertheless,  observed  the  same  pha^nomena  in  other 
metals ;  and  as  far  as  regards  the  sluggishness  of  rotatory  mo- 
tion, traced  it  even  into  bismuth.  The  following  are  the  metals 
which  have  presented  the  phaenomena  in  a  greater  or  smaller 
degree : — 


Copper. 

Silver. 

Gold. 

Zinc. 

Cadmium. 

Tin. 


Mercury. 

Platinum. 

Palladium. 

Lead. 

Antimonv. 

Bismuth. 


2341.  The  accordance  of  these  phaenomena  with  the  beautiful 
discovery  of  Arago',  with  the  results  of  the  experiments  of  Her- 
schel  and  Babbage^,  and  with  my  own  former  inquiries  (81.)^, 
is  very  evident.  Whether  the  effect  obtained  by  Ampere,  with 
his  copper  cylinder  and  heUx'*,  was  of  this  nature,  I  cannot  judge, 
inasmuch  as  the  circumstances  of  the  experiment  and  the  energy 
of  the  apparatus  are  not  sufficiently  stated ;  but  it  probably  may 
have  been. 

^  Annales  de  Chimie,  xxvii.  363;  xxviii.  325  ;  xxxii.  213.  I  am  very  glad 
to  refer  here  to  the  Comptes  Rendus  of  June  9,  1845,  where  it  appears  that  it 
was  M.  Arago  who  first  obtained  his  peculiar  results  by  the  use  of  electro-  as 
well  as  common  magnets. 

2  Philosophical  Transactions,  1825,  p.  46/.  ^  Ibid,  1832,  p.  146. 

*  Biblioth^que  Universelle,  xxi,  p.  48. 


Dec.  1845.] 


in  the  magnetic  field. 


53 


2342.  As,  because  of  other  duties,  three  or  four  weeks  may 
elapse  before  I  shall  be  able  to  complete  the  verification  of  cer- 
itain  experiments  and  conclusions,  I  submit  at  once  these  results 
t  to  the  attention  of  the  Royal  Society,  and  will  shortly  embody 
t  the  account  of  the  action  of  magnets  on  magnetic  metals,  their 
a  action  on  gases  and  vapours,  and  the  general  considerations  in 
a  another  series  of  these  Researches. 

Royal  Institution, 
Nov.  27,  1845. 


54 


TWENTY-FIRST  SERIES'. 

§  27.  On  nev)  magnetic  actions,  and  on  the  magnetic  condition  of 
all  matter — continued.  ^  v.  Action  of  magnets  on  the  mag- 
netic metals  and  their  compounds.  1[  vi.  Action  of  magnets 
on  air  and  gases.    ^  vii.  General  considerations. 

Received  December  24,  1845, — Read  January  8,  1846. 

•[f  V.  Action  of  magnets  on  the  magnetic  metals  and  their  compounds. 

2343.  The  magnetic  characters  of  iron,  nickel  and  cobalt,  are 
well  known ;  and  also  the  fact  that  at  certain  temperatures  they 
lose  their  usual  property  and  become,  to  ordinary  test  and 
observation,  non-magnetic;  then  entering  into  the  list  of  dia- 
magnetic  bodies  and  acting  in  like  manner  with  them.  Closer 
investigation,  however,  has  shown  me  that  they  are  still  very 
different  to  other  bodies,  and  that  though  inactive  when  hot,  on 
common  magnets  or  to  common  tests,  they  are  not  so  abso- 
lutely, but  retain  a  certain  amount  of  magnetic  power  what- 
ever their  temperature ;  and  also  that  this  power  is  the  same  in 
character  with  that  which  they  ordinarily  possess. 

2344.  A  piece  of  iron  wire,  about  1  inch  long  and  0'05  of  an 
inch  in  diameter,  being  thoroughly  cleaned,  was  suspended  at 
the  middle  by  a  fine  platinum  wire  connected  with  the  suspend- 
ing thread  (2249.)  so  as  to  swing  between  the  poles  of  the 
electro-magnet.  The  heat  of  a  spirit-lamp  was  apphed  to  it,  and 
it  soon  acquired  a  temperature  which  rendered  it  quite  insensible 
to  the  presence  of  a  good  ordinary  magnet,  however  closely  it 
was  approached  to  the  heated  iron.  The  temperature  of  the 
iron  was  then  raised  considerably  higher  by  adjustment  of  the 
flame,  and  the  electro-magnet  thrown  into  action.  Immediately 
the  hot  iron  became  magnetic  and  pointed  between  the  poles. 
The  power  was  feeble,  and  in  this  respect  the  state  of  the  iron 

^  Philosophical  Transactions.  184(),  p.  41. 


Dec.  1S45.]         Action  on  iron  and  nickel.  65 

was  in  striking  contrast  with  that  which  it  had  when  cold ;  but 
in  character  the  force  was  precisely  the  same. 

2345.  The  iron  was  then  allowed  to  fall  in  temperature  slowly 
so  that  its  assumption  of  the  higher  magnetic  condition  might 
be  observed.  The  intensity  of  the  force  did  not  appear  to  in- 
crease until  the  temperature  arrived  near  a  certain  point,  and 
then  as  the  heat  continued  to  diminish,  the  iron  rapidly,  but  not 
instantaneously,  acquired  its  high  magnetic  power;  at  which 
time  it  could  not  be  kept  from  the  magnet,  but  flew  to  it,  bending 
the  suspending  wire  and  trembling  as  it  were  with  magnetic 
energy  as  it  adhered  by  one  end  to  the  core. 

2346.  A  small  bar  of  nickel  was  submitted  to  an  experimental 
examination  in  the  same  manner.  This  metal,  as  I  have  shown  ^, 
loses  its  magnetism  as  respects  ordinary  tests  at  a  heat  below 
that  of  boiling  oil,  and  hence  it  is  very  well  fitted  to  show 
whether  the  magnetic  metals  can  have  their  power  entirely  re- 
moved by  heat  or  not ;  and  also  whether  the  disappearance  of 
the  whole  or  greater  portion  of  their  power  is  sudden  or  gradual. 
The  smallness  of  the  mass  to  be  experimented  on  assisted  much 
in  the  determination  of  the  latter  point.  Upon  being  heated  the ' 
nickel  soon  became  indifferent  to  ordinary  magnets;  but  however 
high  the  temperature,  still  it  pointed  to  and  was  attracted  by  the 
electro-magnet.  The  power  was  very  feeble,  but  certain.  It 
was  scarcely  enough  to  sustain  the  weight  of  the  nickel  by  the 
magnetic  action  alone ;  but  was  abundantly  evident  when  the 
metal  was  supported  as  described  (2344.). 

2347.  On  carefully  lowering  the  temperature  of  the  nickel, 
it  was  again  found  that  the  transition  from  one  degree  of  magnetic 
force  to  the  other  was  progressive  and  not  instantaneous.  With 
iron  it  is  difficult  to  preserve  all  the  parts,  either  in  heating  or 
cooling,  so  nearly  at  the  same  temperature  as  to  be  sure  that  it 
is  not  the  union  of  hotter  and  colder  portions  which  gives  the 
appearance  of  an  intermediate  degree  of  magnetism ;  but  with 
nickel  that  is  not  so  difficult,  for  the  progression  is  more  gra- 
dual, so  that  when  in  cooling  the  power  began  to  increase,  the 
cooling  might  be  continued  some  time  before  the  full  degree  of 
power  came  on ;  at  any  time  in  that  period  the  temperature 
might  be  slightly  raised,  and  though  the  power  would  then 


'  Philosophical  Magazine,  1836,  vol.  viii.  p.  179,  or  Experimental  Researches, 
vol.  ii.  p.  219. 


56  Action  of  maynets  on  the       [Series  XXL 

diminish  a  little,  it  could  yet  be  retained  at  a  degree  stronger 
than  the  weakest.  In  fact  it  was  easy  to  keep  the  nickel  at 
many  of  the  intermediate  degrees  of  power,  and  thus  to  remove 
all  doubt  of  the  progressive  assumption  of  the  full  degree  of 
force. 

2348.  I  have  expressed  an  opinion,  founded  on  the  different 
temperatures  at  which  the  magnetic  metals  appeared  to  lose 
their  peculiar  power  ^,  that  all  the  metals  would  probably  have  the 
same  character  of  magnetism  if  their  temperature  could  be  lowered 
sufficiently.  The  facts  just  described  appear  to  me  entirely 
against  such  an  opinion.  The  metals  which  are  magnetic  re- 
tain a  portion  of  their  power  after  the  great  change  has  been  ef- 
fected, or  in  what  might  be  called  their  diamagnetic  state ;  but 
the  other  metals,  such  as  bismuth,  tin,  &c.,  present  no  trace  of 
this  power,  and  therefore  are  not  in  the  condition  of  the  heated 
iron,  nickel,  or  cobalt ;  for  in  fact  whilst  these  point  axially  and 
are  attracted,  the  others  point  equatorially  and  are  repelled.  I 
therefore  hope  to  be  allowed  to  withdraw  the  view  I  then  put 
forth. 

2349.  I  next  proceeded  to  examine  the  peroxides  of  iron,  and 
in  accordance  with  the  observations  of  M.  Becquerel^  and  others 
found  them  all,  both  natural  and  artificial,  possessed  of  magnetic 
power  at  common  temperatures.  I  heated  them  in  tubes  but 
found  them  still  magnetic,  suffering  no  diminution  of  the  force 
by  such  temperature  as  I  could  apply  to  them. 

2350.  Different  specimens  of  the  oxide  of  nickel  were  found 
to  present  the  same  phsenomena.  They  were  magnetic  both 
when  hot  and  cold ;  and  that  heat  should  cause  no  change  in 
this  respect  is  the  more  striking,  because  the  hot  oxide  had  a 
tpmperature  given  to  it  far  higher  than  that  necessary  to  produce 
the  great  magnetic  change  in  the  metal  itself  (2346.). 

235 1.  The  oxide  of  cobalt  also  was  magnetic,  and  equally  mag- 
netic whether  hot  or  cold.  Glass  coloured  blue  by  cobalt  is 
magnetic  in  consequence  of  the  presence  of  the  oxide  of  that 
metal,  and  is  so  whether  hot  or  cold.  In  all  these  cases  the  de- 
gree of  power  retained  was  very  small  compared  to  that  of  the 
pure  metal. 

1  Philosophical  Magazine,  1836,  vol.  viii.  p.  177;  ibid.  1839,  vol.  xiv.  p.  161, 
or  Experimental  Researches,  vol.  ii.  pp.  217,  225. 

2  Annales  de  Chimie,  1827,  vol.  xxxvi.  p.  337.  Comptes  Rendus,  1845,  vol. 
XX.  p.  1708. 


Dec.  1845.]      compounds  of  nuujnetic  metals.  57 

2352.  Proceeding  to  the  salts  of  iron,  I  found  them  magnetic. 
Clean  crystals  of  the  proto-sulphate  of  iron  were  attracted  and 
pointed  axially  very  well ;  so  also  did  the  dry  salt.  As  I  pro- 
ceeded I  found  that  every  salt  and  compound  containing  iron  in 
the  basic  part  was  magnetic.  To  enumerate  the  different  sub- 
stances subjected  to  trial  would  be  tedious ;  the  following  are 
selected  as  illustrations  of  the  variety  in  kind :  

Protochloride. 
Perchloride. 
Iodide. 

Pro  to  sulphate. 
Persulphate. 

2353.  Amongst  native  compounds- 


Protophosphate. 
Perphosphate. 
Nitrate. 
Carbonate. 
Prussian  Blue. 


Bog  iron  ore. 
Haematite. 
Chromate  of  iron. 


Yellow  sulphuret  of  iron. 
Arsenical  pyrites. 
Copper  pyrites,  and  many 
others  M  ere  magnetic. 

2354.  G  reen  bottle-glass  is  comparatively  very  magnetic  from 
the  iron  it  contains,  and  cannot  be  used  as  tubes  to  hold  other 
substances.  Crown  glass  is  magnetic  from  the  same  cause. 
Flint  glass  is  not  magnetic,  but  points  equatorially.  . 

2355.  Crystals  of  the  yellow  ferro-prussiate  of  potassa  were 
not  magnetic,  but  were  repelled  and  set  equatorially ;  and  such 
was  the  case  also  with  red  ferro-prussiate. 

2356.  According  to  my  hopes,  even  the  solutions  of  the  fer- 
ruginous salts,  whether  in  water  or  alcohol,  were  magnetic.  A 
tube  filled  with  a  clear  solution  of  proto-  or  persulphate  of  iron, 
or  proto-  or  perchloride,  or  tincture  of  muriate  of  iron,  was  at- 
tracted by  the  poles,  and  pointed  very  well  between  them  in  the 
axial  direction. 

2357.  These  solutions  supply  a  very  important  means  of  ad- 
vancing magnetical  investigation,  for  they  present  us  with  the 
power  of  making  a  magnet,  which  is  at  the  same  time  liquid, 
transparent,  and  within  certain  limits,  adjustible  to  any  degree 
of  strength.  Hence  the  power  of  examining  a  magnet  optically. 
Hence  also,  the  capability  of  placing  magnetic  portions  of  mat- 
ter one  within  another,  and  so  observing  dynamic  and  other 
phaenomena  within  magnetic  media.  In  fact,  not  only  may  these 
substances  be  placed  as  magnets  in  the  magnetic  field,  but  the 


58 


Action  of  magnets  on  [Series  XXI. 


field  generally  may  be  filled  with  them,  and  then  other  bodies 
and  other  magnets  examined  as  to  their  joint  or  separate  actions 
in  it  (2361.  &c.,). 

2358.  In  reference  to  the  salts  of  nickel  and  cobalt,  pure  cry- 
stals of  the  sulphate  of  nickel  were  found  to  be  well  magnetic, 
and  also  pure  crystals  of  sulphate  of  cobalt.  Solutions  of  the 
sulphate  of  nickel,  the  chloride  of  nickel,  and  the  chloride  of  co- 
balt, were  also  magnetic.  That  I  might  be  perfectly  safe  in  these 
conclusions  I  applied  to  Mr.  Askin  of  Birmingham,  whose  power 
of  separating  nickel  and  cobalt  from  each  other  and  other  metals 
is  well  known,  as  also  the  scale  upon  which  he  carries  on  these 
operations ;  and  he  favoured  me  with  a  solution  of  chloride  of 
nickel  and  another  of  chloride  of  cobalt  perfectly  pure,  both  of 
which  proved  to  be  well  magnetic  between  the  poles  of  my 
magnet. 

2359.  Heat  applied  to  any  of  these  magnetic  solutions  did 
not  diminish  or  affect  their  power. 

2360.  These  results  with  the  salts  of  the  magnetic  metals  con- 
join with  those  before  quoted,  as  tending  to  show  that  the  non- 
magnetic metals  could  not  by  any  change  of  temperature  be 
rendered  magnetic  (2398.),  but  as  a  class  are  distinct  from  iron, 
nickel,  and  cobalt ;  for  none  of  the  compounds  of  the  non-mag- 
netic metals  show,  as  yet,  any  indication  of  ordinary  magnetic 
force,  whereas  in  respect  of  these  three  substances  all  their 
compounds  possess  it. 

2361.  In  illustration  of  the  power  which  the  iron  and  other 
similar  solutions  give  in  the  investigation  of  magnetic  phaeno- 
mena  (2357.),  as  well  as  in  reference  to  the  general  conclusions 
to  be  drawn  from  all  the  facts  described  in  this  paper,  I  will 
proceed  to  describe  certain  anticipated  results  which  were  ob- 
tained by  the  employment  of  these  solutions  in  the  magnetic 
field. 

2362.  A  clear  solution  of  the  proto-sulphate  of  iron  was  pre- 
pared, in  which  one  ounce  of  the  Hquid  contained  seventy-four 
grains  of  the  hydrated  crystals;  a  second  solution  was  prepared 
containing  one  volume  of  the  former  and  three  volumes  of  water; 
a  third  solution  was  made  of  one  volume  of  the  stronger  solu- 
tion and  fifteen  volumes  of  water.  These  solutions  I  will  distm- 
guish  as  Nos.  1,  2,  and  3 ;  the  proportions  of  crystals  of  sul- 
phate of  iron  in  them  were  respectively  as  16,  4,  and  1  per.  cent. 


Dec.  1845.]      solutions  of  sulphate  of  iron. 


59 


nearly.  These  numbers  may,  therefore,  be  taken  as  represent- 
ing (generally  only  (2423.))  the  strength  of  the  magnetic  part 
of  the  liquids. 

2363.  Tubes  like  that  before  described  (2279.)  were  prepared 
and  filled  respectively  with  these  solutions  and  then  hermetically 
sealed,  as  little  air  as  possible  being  left  in  them.  Glasses  of 
the  solutions  were  also  prepared,  large  enough  to  allow  the 
tubes  to  move  freely  in  them,  and  yet  of  such  size  and  shape  as 
would  permit  of  their  being  placed  between  the  magnetic  poles. 
In  this  manner  the  action  of  the  magnetic  forces  upon  the  matter 
in  the  tubes  could  be  examined  and  observed,  both  when  the  tubes 
were  in  diamagnetic  media,  as  air,  water,  alcohol,  &c.,  and  also 
in  magnetic  media,  either  stronger  or  weaker  in  magnetic  force, 
than  the  substances  in  the  tubes. 

2364.  When  these  tubes  were  suspended  in  air  between  the 
poles,  they  all  pointed  axially  or  magnetically,  as  was  to  be  ex- 
pected ;  and  with  forces  apparently  proportionate  to  the  strengths 
of  the  solutions.  When  they  were  immersed  in  alcohol  or  water, 
they  also  pointed  in  the  same  direction  j  the  strongest  solution 
very  well,  and  also  the  second,  but  the  weakest  solution  was 
feeble  in  its  action,  though  very  distinct  in  its  character  (2422.). 

2365.  When  the  tubes,  immersed  in  the  different  ferruginous 
solutions,  were  acted  upon,  the  results  were  very  interesting. 
The  tube  No.  1  (the  strongest  magnetically),  when  in  solution 
No.  1,  had  no  tendency,  under  the  influence  of  the  magnetic 
power,  to  any  particular  position,  but  remained  wherever  it  was 
placed.  Being  placed  in  solution  No.  2,  it  pointed  well  axially, 
and  in  solution  No.  3  it  took  the  same  direction,  but  with  still 
more  power. 

2366.  The  tube  No.  2,  when  in  the  solution  No.  1,  pointed 
equatorially,  i.  e.  as  heavy  glass,  bismuth,  or  a  diamagnetic  body 
generally,  in  air.  In  solution  No.  2  it  was  indifferent,  not  point- 
ing either  way ;  and  in  solution  No.  3  it  pointed  axially,  or  as  a 
magnetic  body.  The  tube  No.  3,  containing  the  weakest  solu- 
tion, pointed  equatorially  in  solutions  No.  1  and  2,  and  not  at  all 
in  solution  No.  3. 

2367.  Several  other  ferruginous  solutions  varying  in  strength 
were  prepared,  and,  as  a  general  and  constant  result,  it  was 
found  that  any  tube  pointed  axially  if  the  solution  in  it  was 


60 


Action  of  magnets  on 


[Series  XXI. 


stronger  than  the  surrounding  solution,  and  equatorially  if  the 
tube  solution  was  the  M'eaker  of  the  two. 

2368.  The  tubes  were  now  suspended  vertically,  so  that  being 
in  the  different  solutions  they  could  be  brought  near  to  one  of 
the  magnetic  poles,  and  employed  in  place  of  the  indicating 
cube  or  sphere  of  bismuth,  or  heavy  glass  (2266.).  The  con- 
stant result  was,  that  when  the  tube  contained  a  stronarer  solu- 
tion  than  that  which  surrounded  it,  it  was  attracted  to  the  pole, 
but  when  its  solution  was  the  weaker  of  the  two  it  was  repelled. 
The  latter  phaenomena  were  as  to  appearance  in  every  respect 
the  same  as  those  presented  in  the  repulsion  of  heavy  glass, 
bismuth,  or  any  other  diamagnetic  body  in  air. 

2369.  Having  described  these  phaenomena,  I  will  defer  their 
further  consideration  until  I  arrive  at  the  last  division  of  this 
paper,  and  proceed  to  certain  results  more  especially  belonging 
to  the  present  part  of  these  Researches. 

2370.  As  the  magnetic  metals,  iron,  nickel  and  cobalt,  pre- 
sent in  their'  compounds  substances  also  distinguished  by  the 
possession  of  magnetic  properties  (2360.),  so  it  appeared  very 
probable  that  other  metals,  of  whose  magnetic  character  doubts 
were  entertained,  because  of  the  possible  presence  of  iron  in  the 
specimens  experimented  viith,  might  in  this  way  have  their 
magnetic  character  tested ;  for  it  seemed  likely,  from  analogy, 
that  every  metal  well  magnetic  per  se,  would  be  magnetic  in  its 
compounds  ;  and,  judging  from  the  character  of  the  great  class 
of  diamagnetic  bodies  (2275.),  that  no  magnetic  compounds 
would  be  obtained  of  a  metal  not  magnetic  of  itself.  Accord- 
ingly I  proceeded  to  apply  this  kind  of  test  to  the  combinations 
of  many  of  the  metals,  and  obtained  the  following  results  : — 

2371.  Titanium. — Wollastonhas  described  the  magnetic  effects 
of  crystals  of  titanium,  expressing  at  the  same  time  a  belief  that 
they  are  due  to  iron^  I  took  a  specimen  of  the  oxide  of  tita- 
nium, which  I  believe  to  be  perfectly  free  from  iron,  and  in- 
closing it  in  a  tube  (2279.),  subjected  it  to  the  action  of  the 
electro-magnet  (2246.  2247.)"  It  proved  to  be  freely  magnetic. 
Another  specimen  obtained  from  Mr.  Johnson,  and  believed  by 
him  to  be  perfectly  free  from  iron,  was  also  magnetic.  Hence 
I  conclude  that  titanium  is  truly  a  magnetic  metal. 

'  Philosophical  Transactions,  1823,  p.  400. 


Dec.  1845.]        metals  and  their  compounds.  61 

2372.  Manganese. — Berthier,  as  far  as  I  am  aware,  first  an- 
nounced that  this  metal  was  magnetic  at  very  low  tempera- 
tures'. On  submitting  specimens  of  the  various  oxides,  which 
were  considered  as  pure,  to  the  magnetic  force,  they  were  all 
found  to  be  magnetic,  especially  the  protoxide.  So  were  the 
following  compounds  of  manganese  in  the  pure,  dry,  or  crystal- 
lized state  : — chloride,  sulphate,  ammonio-sulphate,  phosphate, 
carbonate,  borate ;  and  also  the  chloride,  nitrate,  sulphate,  and 
ammonio-sulphate  when  in  solution.  A  specimen  of  the  am- 
monio-sulphate was  rendered  alkaline  by  the  addition  of  a  little 
carbonate  of  ammonia  boiled  and  then  carefully  crystallized 
thrice :  after  that  the  crystals  and  solution  of  the  purified  salt 
were  perfectly  and  well  magnetic.  I  have  no  doubt,  therefore,  that 
manganese  is  a  magnetic  metal,  as  Berthier  said.  If  any  opinion 
m.ay  be  drawn  concerning  the  magnetic  force  of  the  metal  from 
the  degree  of  magnetism  of  the  compounds,  I  should  expect 
that  manganese  possesses  considerable  power  of  this  kind  when 
at  a  sufficiently  low  temperature^. 

2373.  Cerium. — I  am  not  aware  that  cerium  has  as  yet  been 
classed  with  the  magnetic  metals.  Having  made  experiments 
with  the  hydi'ated  protoxide,  the  carbonate,  and  the  chloride  of 
this  metal,  and  also  with  the  double  sulphate  of  the  oxide  and 
potassa  prepared  with  great  care,  I  found  them  all  magnetic; 
and  those  that  are  soluble  are  magnetic  in  the  state  of  solution. 
Hence,  as  the  compounds  are  undoubtedly  magnetic,  there  is 
every  reason  to  believe  that  cerium  also  is  a  magnetic  metal 
(2370.). 

2374.  Chromium. — The  magnetic  phsenomena  of  chromium 
compounds  are  very  interesting.  Portions  of  the  chromate 
and  the  bichromate  of  potassa  were  purified  by  three  careful 
crystallizations  each  ;  part  of  the  bichromate  was  heated  in  a 
platinum  crucible,  until  the  second  equivalent  of  chromic  acid 
was  converted  into  the  crystallized  oxide,  and  this  being  washed 
out  and  dried  was  found  to  be  well  magnetic.  So  were  all  the 
other  specimens  of  oxide  of  chromium  which  were  examined. 

A  specimen  of  Warrington's  chromic  acid  was  found  to  be 
very  feebly  magnetic. 

'  Traits  des  Essais  par  la  Voie  Seche,  tome  i.  p.  532.  Philosophical  Ma- 
gazine, 1845,  vol,  xxvii.  p.  2. 

'  Philosophical  Magazine,  1845,  vol.  xxvii.  p.  2. 


62 


Action  of  magnets  on 


[Series  XXI. 


2375.  Chromate  of  lead,  when  subjected  to  the  magnet,  pointed 
equatorially  and  was  repelled.  Such  was  the  case  also  with 
crystals  of  the  chromate  of  potassa.  Crystals  of  the  bichromate, 
however,  did  not  act  thus ;  for  if  in  any  way  affected  they  were 
in  the  least  degree  magnetic,  showing  the  influence  of  the  in- 
creased proportion  of  chromic  acid.  Solutions  of  either  salt 
pointed  well  equatorially  and  were  repelled  ;  thus  showing  the 
diamagnetic  influence  of  the  water  present  (2422.). 

2376.  As  just  stated,  a  solution  of  the  bichromate  contained 
in  a  tube,  pointed  equatorially  and  was  repelled ;  but  if  the  same 
solution  had  a  little  alcohol  added  to  it,  and  also  some  pm'e  mu- 
riatic or  sulphuric  acid,  and  were  then  heated  for  a  few  minutes 
to  reduce  the  chromic  acid  to  the  state  of  oxide  or  chloride,  then, 
on  being  returned  to  the  tube  and  subjected  to  the  magnet,  it 
was  found  strongly  magnetic. 

2377-  I  think  it  has  before  been  said  that  chromium  is  a  mag- 
netic metal ;  as  these  results  have  been  obtained  with  its  pure 
compounds,  there  is  no  longer  any  doubt  on  my  mind  that  such 
is  the  case. 

2378.  Lead. — The  compounds  of  lead  point  equatorially  and 
are  repelled.  The  substances  tried  were  the  chloride,  iodide, 
sulphuret,  nitrate,  sulphate,  phosphate,  carbonate,  protoxide 
fused,  and  the  acetate.  A  portion  of  very  carefully  crystallized 
nitrate  being  dissolved  was  precipitated  by  pure  zinc,  and  the 
lead  obtained  washed  with  dilute  nitric  acid,  to  remove  subsalts. 
Such  lead  ■v^'as  free  from  magnetism,  and  therefore  the  metal 
ranks  in  the  diamagnetic  class,  both  directly  and  by  its  com- 
pounds. Lead  usually  appears  to  be  magnetic,  and  it  is  not 
very  easy  to  obtain  the  metal  in  the  pure  diamagnetic  state. 

2379-  Platinum. — I  have,  as  yet,  found  no  wrought  specimens 
of  this  metal  free  from  magnetism,  not  even  those  prepared  by 
Dr.  Wollaston  himself,  and  left  with  the  Royal  Society.  Speci- 
mens of  the  purest  platinum  obtained  from  Mr.  J ohnson  were 
also  found  to  be  slightly  magnetic. 

2380.  Clean  platinum  foil  and  cuttings  were  dissolved  in  pure 
nitro-muriatic  acid,  and  the  solution  evaporated  to  dryness.  Both 
the  solution  and  the  dry  chloride  pointed  equatorially  and  were 
repelled  by  the  magnet.  A  part  of  the  chloride,  being  dissolved 
and  rendered  acid,  was  precipitated  by  an  acid  solution  of  muri- 
ate of  ammonia,  and  the  ammonio-chloride  of  platinum  washed 


Dec.  1845,]        metals  and  their  compounds. 


63 


and  dried :  it  also,  at  the  magnet,  pointed  equatorially  and  was 
repelled.  A  portion  of  this  amraonio-chloride,  decomposed  in 
a  flint-glass  tube  by  heat,  gave  spongy  platinum,  which  being 
pressed  together  into  a  cake,  pointing  axially  and  was  attracted 
at  the  side  of  the  magnetic  pole,  being  magnetic. 

2381.  At  present  I  believe  that  platinum  is  as  a  metal  mag- 
netic, though  very  slightly  so  ;  and  that  in  the  compounds,  the 
change  of  state  and  the  presence  of  other  substances  having  the 
diamagnetic  character,  are  sufficient  to  cover  this  property  and 
make  the  whole  compound  diamagnetic  (2422.). 

2382.  Palladium. — All  the  palladium  in  the  possession  of  the 
Royal  Society,  prepared  by  Dr.  Wollaston,  amounting  to  ten 
ingots  and  rolled  plates,  is  magnetic.  Specimens  of  the  metal 
from  Mr.  Johnson,  considered  as  pure,  were  also  slightly  mag- 
netic. The  chloride,  the  ammonio-bichloride,  and  the  cyanuret 
of  palladium,  pointed  equatorially  and  were  repelled  by  the  mag- 
net. The  same  cyanuret,  reduced  by  heat  either  in  open  plati- 
num vessels  or  in  close  glass  tubes,  gave  palladium  possessing  a 
feeble  degree  of  magnetic  property.  Some  of  Wollaston^s  palla- 
dium was  dissolved  in  pure  nitromuriatic  acid,  and  the  solution 
slowly  acted  upon  by  pure  zinc,  free  from  iron,  and  not  mag- 
netic. Five  successive  portions  of  the  precipitated  metal  were 
collected,  and  all  were  magnetic.  Ammonio-bichloride  of  palla- 
dium was  prepared  from  the  same  solution  by  pure  acid  muriate 
of  ammonia,  and  digested  in  nitromuriatic  acid.  The  salt  itself 
was  repelled,  being  diamagnetic  ;  but  when  reduced  by  heat  in 
glass  tubes,  or  in  Berlin  capsules,  the  palladium  obtained  was 
magnetic.  From  the  result  of  all  the  experiments,  I  believe  the 
metal  to  be  feebly  but  truly  magnetic. 

2383.  Arsenic. — This  metal  required  very  particular  examina- 
tion, and  even  when  carefully  sublimed  twice  or  thrice  in  suc- 
cession, presented  appearances  which  sometimes  made  me  class 
it  with  the  magnetic,  and  at  other  times  with  the  diamagnetic 
bodies.  On  the  whole,  I  incline  to  believe  that  it  belongs  to  the 
latter  series  of  substances,  being  only  in  a  very  small  degree  re- 
moved from  the  zero  or  medium  point.  Pure  white  arsenic 
points  freely  in  an  equatorial  direction,  and  is  repelled  by  a  mag- 
netic pole. 

2384.  In  reference  to  the  pointing  of  short  bars  between  mag- 


Action  of  magnets  on  [Series  XX I . 

netic  poles  exposing  large  flat  faces,  I  ought  to  observe,  that 
such  bars  will  sometimes  point  axially  and  seem  to  be  magnetic 
when  they  do  not  belong  to  that  class,  and  are  repelled  by  a 
single  pole.  The  cause  of  this  effect  has  been  already  given 
(2298.  2299.),  and  is  obviated  by  the  use  of  poles  having  wedge- 
shaped  or  conical  terminations. 

2385.  Osmium. — Osmic  acid  from  Mr.  Johnson,  in  fine  trans- 
parent crystals,  was  clearly  diamagnetic,  being  repelled.  Speci- 
mens of  the  metal  and  of  the  protoxide  were  both  slightly  mag- 
netic. The  protoxide  had  been  obtained  by  the  action  of  alcohol 
on  a  solution  of  osmic  acid  which  had  twice  been  distilled  with 
water,  and  the  metal  was  believed  to  be  perfectly  free  from  other 
substances.  Probably,  therefore,  osmium  belongs  to  the  mag- 
netic class. 

2386.  Iridium. — Mr.  Johnson  supplied  me  with  several  pre- 
parations of  iridium.  The  oxide,  chloride,  and  amraonio-chlo- 
ride  were  magnetic ;  and  so  was  a  sample  of  the  metal.  One 
specimen  of  the  metal,  which  seemed  to  be  very  pure,  was 
scarcely  at  all  magnetic ;  and  on  the  whole,  I  incline  to  believe 
that  iridium  does  not  stand  in  the  magnetic  class.  , 

2387.  Rhodium. — A  well-fused  specimen  of  this  metal,  pre- 
pared by  Dr.  Wollaston,  was  magnetic ;  but  crystals  of  the  chlo- 
ride and  the  sodio-chloride  of  rhodium  prepared  by  the  same 
philosopher,  and  others  also  from  Mr.  Johnson,  were  not  mag- 
netic, but  pointed  well  equatorially.  I  conclude,  therefore,  that 
the  metal  is  probably  not  magnetic,  or  if  magnetic,  is  but  little 
removed  from  the  zero  point. 

2388.  Uranium. — Peroxide  of  this  metal  was  obtained  not 
magnetic ;  protoxide  very  slightly  magnetic :  I  have  set  the 
metal  for  the  present  in  the  diamagnetic  class. 

2389.  Tungsten. — The  oxide  of  this  metal,  and  also  the  acid, 
were  submitted  to  examination,  and  found  to  point  well  equa- 
torially. The  acid  was  distinctly  repelled  by  a  single  magnetic 
pole;  the  oxide  appeared  nearly  neutral.  Hence  1  have,  for  the 
present,  considered  tungsten  as  a  diamagnetic  metal. 

2390.  Silver  is  not  magnetic  (2291.),  nor  its  compounds. 

2391.  Antimony  is  not  magnetic  (2291.),  nor  its  com- 
pounds. 

2392.  Bismuth  is  not  magnetic  (2291.),  nor  its  compounds. 


Dec.  1845.]         Metais  and  their  compounds. 


65 


Having  tried  many  of  the  compounds  of  each  of  these  three 
metals,  I  thought  it  well  to  record  the  accordance  existing  be- 
tween them  and  their  metallic  bases  (2370.). 

2393.  Sodium. — A  fine  large  globule,  equal  to  half  a  cubic 
inch  in  size,  was  well  repelled,  and  is  therefore  diamagnetic. 

2394.  Magnesium. — None  of  the  compounds  or  salts  of  this 
base  are  magnetic. 


2395.  Culcium. 

Strontium. 
Barium. 


Sodium. 

Potassium. 

Ammonia. 


None  of  the  compounds  or  salts  of  these  substances  are  magnetic. 

2396.  From  the  characters,  therefore,  of  the  compounds,  as 
well  as  from  direct  evidence  in  respect  of  some  of  the  metals,  it 
would  appear  that,  besides  iron,  nickel,  and  cobalt,  the  following 
are  also  magnetic;  namely,  titanium,  manganese,  cerium,  chro- 
mium, palladium,  platinum.  It  is,  however,  very  probable  that 
there  may  be  metals  possessing  distinct  magnetic  power,  yet  in 
so  slight  a  degree,  as,  like  platinum  and  palladium,  not  to  exhibit 
in  their  compounds  any  sensible  trace  of  it.  Such  may  be  the 
case  with  tungsten,  uranium,  rhodium,  he. 

2397.  I  have  heated  several  of  the  diamagnetic  metals,  even 
up  to  their  fusing-points,  but  have  not  been  able  to  observe  any 
change,  either  in  the  character  or  degree  of  their  magnetic  rela- 
tions. 

2398.  Perhaps  the  cooling  of  some  of  the  metals,  whose  com- 
pounds, like  those  of  iron,  nickel  and  cobalt,  are  magnetic, 
might  develope  in  them  a  much  higher  degree  of  force,  than 
any  which  they  have  as  yet  been  known  to  possess.  Manganese^ 
chromium,  cerium,  titanium,  are  metals  of  much  interest  in  this 
point  of  view.  Osmium,  iridium,  rhodium  and  uranium,  ought 
to  be  subjected  with  them  to  the  same  trial. 

2399.  The  following  is  an  attempt  to  arrange  some  of  the 
metals  in  order,  as  respects  their  relation  to  magnetic  force. 
The  0°  or  medium  point  is  supposed  to  be  the  condition  of  a 
metal  or  substance  indifferent  to  the  magnetic  force  as  respects 
attraction  or  repulsion  in  air  or  space.  The  further  substances 
are  placed  from  this  point,  the  more  distinctive  are  they  as  re- 
gards their  attraction  or  repulsion  by  the  magnet.  Nevertheless 
this  order  may,  very  probably,  be  found  inaccurate  by  more 
careful  observation. 

VOL,.  III.  „ 


66 


Action  of  magnets 


[Series  XXI. 


Diaraagnetic. 


Bismuth. 

Antimony. 
Zinc. 

Tin. 

Cadmium. 

Magnetic. 

Iron. 

Nickel. 

Sodium. 

Mercury. 

Lead. 

Cobalt. 

Silver. 

Mane'anese. 
Chromium. 

V^W  Lf  jJCI  • 

Gold. 

Cerium. 

Arsenic. 

Titanium. 

Uranium. 

Palladium. 

Rhodium. 

Platinum. 

Iridium. 

Osmium. 

Tungsten. 

V 

0° 

^  vi.  Action  of  magnets  on  air  and  gases.  " 

2400.  It  was  impossible  to  advance  in  an  experimental  in- 
vestigation of  the  kind  now^  described,  without  having  the  mind 
impressed  with  various  theoretical  views  of  the  mode  of  action 
of  the  bodies  producing  the  phasnomena.  In  the  passing  con- 
sideration of  these  views,  the  apparently  middle  condition  which 
air  held  between  magnetic  and  diamagnetic  substances  was  of 
the  utmost  interest,  and  led  to  many  experiments  upon  its  pro- 
bable influence,  which  I  will  now  proceed  briefly  to  describe. 

2401.  A  thin  flint-glass  tube,  in  which  common  air  was  her- 
metically enclosed,  was  placed  between  the  magnetic  poles 
(2249.)  surrounded  by  air,  and  the  effect  of  the  magnetic  force 
observed  upon  it.  There  was  a  very  feeble  tendency  of  the  tube 
to  an  equatorial  position,  due  to  the  substance  of  the  tube  in 
which  the  air  was  enclosed. 

2402.  The  air  was  then  withdrawn  from  around  the  tube 
more  or  less,  and  at  last  up  to  the  highest  amount  which  a  good 
air-pump  M'ould  effect;  but  whatever  the  degree  of  rarefaction, 
the  tube  of  air  still  seemed  to  be  affected  exactly  in  the  same 
manner  as  if  surrounded  by  air  of  its  own  density. 

2403.  I  then  surrounded  the  ai\'-tube  with  hydrogen  and  car- 


Dec.  1845.] 


on  air  and  gases. 


67 


bonic  acid  in  succession;  but  in  both  these,  and  in  each  of  them 
at  different  degrees  of  rarefaction,  the  tube  of  air  remained  as 
indifferent  as  before. 

2404.  Hence  there  appears  to  be  no  sensible  distinction  be- 
tween dense  or  rare  air ;  or,  as  far  as  these  experiments  go,  be- 
tween one  gas  or  vapour  and  another. 

2405.  As  it  did  not  seem  at  all  unlikely  that  the  equatorial  and 
axial  set  of  bodies,  or  their  repulsions  and  attractions,  might 
depend  upon  converse  actions  of  the  media  by  which  they  were 
surrounded  (2361.),  so  I  proceeded  to  examine  what  would  occur 
with  diamagnetic  substances,  when  the  air  or  gas  which  sur- 
rounded them  was  changed  in  its  density  or  nature,  or  what 
would  happen  to  air  itself  when  surrounded  by  these  substances. 

2406.  The  air  tube  (2401.)  was  suspended  horizontally  in 
water  (being  retained  below  the  surface  by  a  cube  of  bismuth 
attached  to  it,  just  beneath  the  point  of  suspension,  which  there- 
fore could  have  no  power  of  giving  it  direction) ;  it  was  then 
subjected  to  the  magnetic  forces,  and  imediately  pointed  well  in 
an  axial  direction,  or  as  a  magnet  would  have  done.  Being 
brought  near  to  one  pole,  it  moved,  on  the  supervention  of  the 
magnetic  force,  appearing  as  if  attracted  after  the  manner  of  a 
magnetic  body;  and  this  continued  as  long  as  the  magnetic 
force  was  sustained  in  action. 

2407.  The  air-tube  was  in  like  manner  subjected  to  the  action 
of  the  magnetic  force,  Avhen  surrounded  by  alcohol,  and  also  by 
oil  of  turpentine,  with  precisely  the  same  results  as  in  water. 
In  all  these  cases  the  action  of  air  in  the  fluids  was  precisely  the 
same  as  the  action  of  a  magnetic  body  in  air.  The  air-tube 
was  subjected  to  the  action  of  the  magnet  even  when  under  the 
surface  of  mercury,  and  here  also  it  pointed  axially. 

2408.  In  order  to  extend  the  experimental  relations  of  air  and 
gases,  I  proceeded  to  place  substances  of  the  diamagnetic  class 
in  them.  Thus  the  bar  of  heavy  glass  (2253.)  was  suspended 
in  a  jar  of  air,  and  then  the  air  about  it  more  or  less  rarefied, 
but  as  before,  in  the  case  of  the  air-tube  (2402.),  alterations 
of  this  kind  produced  no  effect.  Whether  the  bar  were  in  air 
at  the  ordinary  pressure,  or  as  rare  as  the  pump  could  render  it, 
it  still  pointed  equatorially,  and  apparently  always  with  the 
same  degree  of  force. 

2409.  The  bar  of  bismuth  (2296.)  was  suspended  in  the  jar 

F  2 


68 


Action  of  magnets  on  gases.    [Sejries  XXI. 


and  the  same  alteration  in  the  density  of  the  air  made  as  before; 
but  this  caused  no  difference  in  the  action  of  the  bismuth, 
either  in  kind  or  degree.  Carbonic  acid  and  hydrogen  gases 
were  then  introduced  in  succession  into  the  jar,  and  these  also 
were  employed  in  different  degrees  of  rarefaction,  but  the  re- 
sults were  the  same ;  no  change  took  place  in  the  action  on  the 
bismuth. 

2410.  A  bismuth  cube  was  suspended  in  air  and  gases  at  or- 
dinary pressure,  and  also  rarefied  as  much  as  could  be,  and 
under  these  circumstances  it  was  brought  near  the  magnetic  pole 
and  its  repulsion  observed;  its  action  was  in  all  these  cases  pre- 
cisely the  same  as  in  the  atmosphere. 

2411.  The  perpendicular  copper  bar  (2323.)  was  suspended 
near  the  magnetic  pole  in  vacuo,  but  its  set,  sluggish  move- 
ments and  revulsion  were  just  the  same  as  before  in  air  (2324.). 

2412.  The  following  preparations  in  tubes  (2401.),  namely,  a. 
vacuum,  air,  hydrogen,  carbonic  acid  gas,  sulphurous  acid  gas, 
and  vapour  of  aether,  M'ere  surrounded  by  water,  and  then  sub- 
jected to  the  magnetic  force;  they  all  pointed  axially,  and,  as 
far  as  I  could  perceive,  with  equal  force.  Being  placed  in  alco- 
hol, the  same  effect  occurred. 

2413.  The  same  preparations  being  surrounded  by  air,  or  by 
carbonic  acid  gas,  all  set  equatorially. 

2414.  The  axial  position  of  the  tubes  in  the  hquid  (2412.) 
depends,  doubtless,  upon  the  relation  of  the  contents  of  the 
tube  to  the  surrounding  medium;  for  as  far  as  the  matter  of  the 
tube -is  concerned,  it  alone  would  have  tended  to  give  the  equa- 
torial position.  In  the  following  succeeding  experiments  (24 13.), 
where  the  tubes  of  gases  were  in  surrounding  gases,  the  equa- 
torial position  is  due  to  this  effect  of  the  glass  of  the  tube  ;  and 
that  it  should  produce  its  constant  feeble  effect,  undisturbed  by 
all  the  variations  of  the  gases  and  vapours,  is  a  proof  how  like 
and  how  indifferent  these  are  one  to  the  other. 

2415.  I  suspended  a  tube  of  liquid  sulphurous  acid  in  gaseous 
sulphurous  acid;  when  under  the  magnetic  influence,  the  liquid 
pointed  well  equatorially.  I  surrounded  liquid  nitrous  acid  by 
gaseous  nitrous  acid ;  the  liquid  pointed  well  equatorially.  I 
placed  liquid  ajther  in  the  vapour  of  aether ;  the  former  pointed 
equathrially.  Upon  suspending  the  tube  of  vapour  of  aether  in 
liquid  rether,  the  vapour  pointed  axially. 


Dec.  1845.] 


Law  of  diamagnetic  action. 


69 


2416.  In  every  kind  of  trial,  therefore,  and  in  every  form  of 
experiment,  the  gases  and  vapours  still  occupy  a  medium  posi- 
tion between  the  magnetic  and  the  diamagnetic  classes.  Fur- 
ther, whatever  the  chemical  or  other  properties  of  the  substances, 
however  different  in  their  specific  gravity,  or  however  varied  in 
their  own  degree  of  rarefaction,  they  all  become  alike  in  their 
magnetic  relation,  and  apparently  equivalent  to  a  perfect  vacuum. 
Bodies  which  are  very  marked  as  diamagnetic  substances,  im- 
mediately lose  all  traces  of  this  character  w^hen  they  become 
vaporous  (2415.).  It  would  be  exceedingly  interesting  to  know 
whether  a  body  from  the  magnetic  class,  as  chloride  of  iron, 
would  undergo  the  same  change. 

^  vii.  General  considerations. 

2417.  Such  ai'e  the  facts  which,  in  addition  to  those  presented 
by  the  pheenomena  of  light,  establish  a  magnetic  action  or  con- 
dition of  matter  new  to  our  knowledge.  Under  this  action,  an 
elongated  portion  of  such  matter  usually  (2253.  2384.)  places 
itself  at  right  angles  to  the  lines  of  magnetic  force  j  this  result 
may  be  resolved  into  the  simpler  one  of  repulsion  of  the  matter 
by  either  magnetic  pole.  The  set  of  the  elongated  portion,  or 
the  repulsion  of  the  whole  mass,  continues  as  long  as  the  mag- 
netic force  is  sustained,  and  ceases  with  its  cessation. 

2418.  By  the  exertion  of  this  new  condition  of  force,  the 
body  moved  may  pass  either  along  the  magnetic  lines  or  across 
them ;  and  it  may  move  along  or  across  them  in  either  or  any 
direction.  So  that  two  portions  of  matter,  simultaneously  sub- 
ject to  this  power,  may  be  made  to  approach  each  other  as  if 
they  were  mutually  attracted,  or  recede  as  if  mutually  repelled. 
All  the  phaenomena  resolve  themselves  into  this,  that  a  portion 
of  such  matter,  when  under  magnetic  action,  tends  to  move 
from  stronger  to  weaker  places  or  points  of  force.  When  the 
substance  is  surrounded  by  lines  of  magnetic  force  of  equal 
power  on  all  sides,  it  does  not  tend  to  move,  and  is  then  in 
marked  contradistinction  with  a  linear  current  of  electricity 
under  the  same  circumstances. 

2419.  This  condition  and  effect  is  new,  not  onhj  as  it  respects 
the  exertion  of  power  by  a  magnet  over  bodies  previously  sup- 
posed to  be  indifferent  to  its  influence,  but  is  new  as  a  magnetic 
action,  presenting  us  with  a  second  mode  in  which  the  magnetic 


70 


Generality  of  magnetic  action.    [Series  XXI. 


power  can  exert  its  influenee.  These  two  modes  are  in  the 
same  general  antithetical  relation  to  each  other  as  positive  and 
negative  in  electricity,  or  as  northness  and  southness  in  polarity, 
or  as  the  lines  of  electric  and  magnetic  force  in  magneto-elec- 
tricity ;  and  the  diamagnetic  phaenomena  are  the  more  import- 
ant, because  they  extend  largely,  and  in  a  new  direction,  that 
character  of  duality  which  the  magnetic  force  already,  in  a  cer- 
tain degree,  "was  known  to  possess. 

2420.  All  matter  appears  to  be  subject  to  the  magnetic  force 
as  universally  as  it  is  to  the  gravitating,  the  electric  and  the 
chemical  or  cohesive  forces;  for  that  which  is  not  affected  by  it 
in  the  manner  of  ordinary  magnetic  action,  is  affected  in  the  man- 
ner T  have  now  described;  the  matter  possessing  for  the  time  the 
solid  or  fluid  state.  Hence  substances  appear  to  arrange  them- 
selves into  two  great  divisions ;  the  magnetic,  and  that  which  I 
have  called  the  diamagnetic  classes ;  and  between  these  classes 
the  contrast  is  so  great  and  direct,  though  varying  in  degree, 
that  where  a  substance  from  the  one  class  will  be  attracted,  a 
body  from  the  other  will  be  repelled ;  and  where  a  bar  of  the  one 
will  assume  a  certain  position,  a  bar  of  the  other  will  acquire  a 
position  at  right  angles  to  it. 

2421.  As  yet  I  have  not  found  a  single  solid  or  fluid  body, 
not  being  a  mixture,  that  is  perfectly  neutral  in  relation  to  the 
two  lists ;  i.  e.  that  is  neither  attracted  nor  repelled  in  air.  It 
would  probably  be  important  to  the  consideration  of  magnetic 
action,  to  know  if  there  were  any  natural  simple  substance  pos- 
sessing this  condition  in  the  solid  or  fluid  state.  Of  compound 
or  mixed  bodies  there  may  be  many ;  and  as  it  may  be  im- 
portant to  the  advancement  of  experimental  investigation,  I  will 
describe  the  principles  on  which  such  a  substance  was  prepared 
when  required  for  use  as  a  circumambient  medium. 

2422.  It  is  manifest  that  the  properties  of  magnetic  and  dia- 
magnetic bodies  are  in  opposition  as  respects  their  dynamic 
effects ;  and,  therefore,  that  by  a  due  mixture  of  bodies  from 
each  class,  a  substance  having  any  intermediate  degree  of  the 
property  of  either  may  be  obtained.  Protosulphate  of  iron 
belongs  to  the  magnetic,  and  water  to  the  diamagnetic  class ; 
and  using  these  substances,  I  found  it  easy  to  make  a  solution 
which  was  neither  attracted  nor  repelled,  nor  pointed  when  in 
air.    Such  a  solution  pointed  axially  when  surrounded  by  water. 


Dec.  1845.]      Generality  of  magnetic  action.  71 

If  made  somewhat  weaker  in  respect  of  the  iron,  it  would  point 
axially  in  water  but  equatorially  in  air ;  and  it  could  be  made  to 
pass  more  and  more  into  the  magnetic  or  the  diamagnetic  class 
by  the  addition  of  more  sulphate  of  iron  or  more  water. 

2423.  Thus  a  fluid  medium  was  obtained,  which,  practically, 
as  far  as  I  could  perceive,  had  every  magnetic  character  and 
effect  of  a  gas,  and  even  of  a  vacuum ;  and  as  we  possess  both 
magnetic  and  diamagnetic  glass  (2354.),  it  is  evidently  possible 
to  prepare  a  solid  substance  possessing  the  same  neutral  mag- 
netic character. 

2424.  The  endeavour  to  form  a  general  list  of  substances  in 
the  present  imperfect  state  of  our  knowledge  would  be  very 
premature :  the  one  below  is  given  therefore  only  for  the  pur- 
pose of  conveying  an  idea  of  the  singular  association  under 
which  bodies  come  in  relation  to  magnetic  force,  and  for  the  pur- 
pose of  general  reference  hereafter : — 

Iron. 
Nickel. 
Cobalt. 
Manganese. 
Palladium. 
Crown-glass. 
Platinum. 
Osmium. 
0°  Air  and  vacuum. 
Arsenic, 
^ther. 
Alcohol. 
Gold. 
Water. 
Mercury. 
Flint-glass. 
Tin. 

Heavy  glass. 
Antimony. 
Phosphorus. 
Bismuth. 

2425.  It  is  very  interesting  to  observe  that  metals  are  the 
substances  which  stand  at  the  extremities  of  the  list,  being  of 
all  bodies  those  which  are  most  powerfully  opposed  to  each 


72  Paramagnetic  and  diamagnetic action  compared.  [Series  XXI. 

other  in  their  magnetic  condition.  It  is  also  a  very  remarkable 
circumstance,  that  these  differences  and  departures  from  the 
medium  condition,  are  in  the  metals  at  the  two  extremes,  iron 
and  bismuth,  associated  with  a  small  conducting  power  for  elec- 
tricity. At  the  same  time  the  contrast  between  these  metals,  as 
to  their  fibrous  and  granular  state,  their  malleable  and  brittle  cha- 
racter, will  press  upon  the  mind  whilst  contemplating  the  possi- 
ble condition  of  their  molecules  when  subjected  to  magnetic  force. 

2426.  In  reference  to  the  metals,  as  Avell  as  the  diamagnetics 
not  of  that  class  (2286.),  it  is  satisfactory  to  have  such  an 
answer  to  the  opinion  that  all  bodies  are  magnetic  as  iron,  as 
does  not  consist  in  a  mere  negation  of  that  which  is  affirmed, 
but  in  proofs  that  they  are  in  a  different  and  opposed  state,  and 
are  able  to  counteract  a  very  considerable  degree  of  magnetic 
force  (2448.). 

2427.  As  already  stated,  the  magnetic  force  is  so  strikingly 
distinct  in  its  action  upon  bodies  of  the  magnetic  and  the  dia- 
magnetic class,  that  when  it  causes  the  attraction  of  the  one  it 
produces  the  repulsion  of  the  other  ;  and  this  we  cannot  help  re- 
ferring, in  some  way,  to  an  action  upon  the  molecules  or  the  mass 
of  the  substances  acted  upon,  by  which  they  are  thrown  into 
different  conditions  and  affected  accordingly.  In  that  point  of 
view  it  is  very  striking  to  compare  the  results  with  those  which 
are  presented  to  us  by  a  polarized  ray,  especially  as  then  a  re- 
markable difference  comes  into  view^ ;  for  if  transparent  bodies 
be  taken  from  the  two  classes,  as  for  instance,  heavy  glass  or 
water  from  the  diamagnetic,  and  a  piece  of  green  glass  or  a 
solution  of  green  vitriol  from  the  magnetic  class,  then  a  given 
line  of  magnetic  force  will  cause  the  repulsion  of  one  and  the 
attraction  of  the  other;  but  this  same  line  of  force,  which  thus 
affects  the  particles  so  differently,  affects  the  polarized  ray  when 
passing  through  them  precisely  in  the  same  manner  in  both 
cases;  for  the  two  bodies  cause  its  rotation  in  the  same  direction 
(2160.  2199.  2224.), 

2428.  This  consideration  becomes  even  more  important  when 
we  connect  it  with  the  diamagnetic  and  the  optical  properties  of 
bodies  which  rotate  a  polarized  ray.  Thus  the  iron  solution 
and  a  piece  of  quartz,  having  the  power  to  rotate  a  ray,  point 
by  the  influence  of  the  same  line  of  magnetic  force,  the  one 
axially  and  the  other  equatorially ;  but  the  rotation  which  is 


Decisis.]    Nature  of  the  diamagnelic  condition.  '  73 


impressed  on  a  ray  of  light  by  tliese  two  bodies,  as  far  as  they 
are  under  the  influence  of  the  same  magnetic  force,  is  the  same 
for  both.  Further,  this  rotation  is  quite  independent  of,  and 
quite  unlike  that  of  the  quartz  in  a  most  important  point;  for 
the  quartz  by  itself  can  only  rotate  the  ray  in  one  direction,  but 
under  the  influence  of  the  magnetic  force  it  can  rotate  it  both  to 
th,e  right  and  left,  according  to  the  course  of  the  ray  (2231. 
2232.).  Or,  if  two  pieces  of  quartz  (or  two  tubes  of  oil  of  tur- 
pentine) be  taken  which  can  rotate  the  ray  different  ways,  the 
further  rotative  force  manifested  by  them  when  under  the 
dominion  of  the  magnetism  is  always  the  same  way ;  and  the 
direction  of  that  way  may  be  made  either  to  the  right  or  left  in 
either  crystal  of  quartz.  All  this  time  the  contrast  between  the 
quartz  as  a  diamagnetic,  and  the  solution  of  iron  as  a  magnetic 
body  remains  undisturbed.  Certain  considerations  regarding 
the  character  of  a  ray,  arising  from  these  contrasts,  press  strongly 
on  my  mind,  which,  when  I  have  had  time  to  submit  them  to 
further  experiment,  I  hope  to  present  to  the  Society. 

2429.  Theoretically,  an  explanation  of  the  movements  of  the 
diamagnetic  bodies,  and  all  the  dynamic  phaenomona  consequent 
upon  the  actions  of  magnets  on  them,  might  be  offered  in  the 
supposition  that  magnetic  induction  caused  in  them  a  cpntrary 
state  to  that  which  it  produced  in  magnetic  matter ;  i.  e.  that  if 
a  particle  of  each  kind  of  matter  were  placed  in  the  magnetic 
field  both  would  become  magnetic,  and  each  would  have  its  axis 
parallel  to  the  resultant  of  magnetic  force  passing  through  it;  but 
the  particle  of  magnetic  matter  would  have  its  north  and  south 
poles  opposite,  or  facing  towards  the  contrary  poles  of  the  in- 
ducing magnet,  whereas  with  the  diamagnetic  particles  the 
reverse  would  be  the  case ;  and  hence  would  result  approxima- 
tion in  the  one  substance,  recession  in  the  other. 

2430.  Upon  Ampere's  theory,  this  view  would  be  equivalent 
to  the  supposition,  that  as  currents  are  induced  in  iron  and 
magnetics  parallel  to  those  existing  in  the  inducing  magnet  or 
battery  wire;  so  in  bismuth,  heavy  glass  and  diamagnetic  bodies, 
the  currents  induced  are  in  the  contrary  direction.  This  would 
make  the  currents  in  diamagnetics  the  same  in  direction  as  those 
which  are  induced  in  diamagnetic  conductors  at  the  commence- 
ment of  the  inducing  current;  and  those  in  magnetic  bodies  the 
samfe  as  those  produced  at  the  cessation  of  the  same  inducing 


74 


Action  of  magnets  on 


[Series  XXI. 


current.  No  difficulty  would  occur  as  respects  non-conducting 
magnetic  and  diamagnetic  substances,  because  the  hypothetical 
currents  are  supposed  to  exist  not  in  the  mass,  but  round  the 
particles  of  the  matter. 

2431.  As  far  as  experiment  yet  bears  upon  such  a  notion,  we 
may  observe,  that  the  known  inductive  effects  upon  masses  of 
magnetic  and  diamagnetic  metals  are  the  same.  If  a  straight 
rod  of  iron  be  carried  across  magnetic  lines  of  force,  or  if  it,  or 
a  helix  of  iron  rods  or  wire,  be  held  near  a  magnet,  as  the  power 
in  it  rises  electric  currents  are  induced,  which  move  through  the 
bars  or  helix  in  certain  determinate  directions  (38.  114.,  &c.). 
If  a  bar  or  a  helix  of  bismuth  be  employed  under  the  same  cir- 
cumstances the  currents  are  again  induced,  and  precisely  in  the 
same  direction  as  in  the  iron,  so  that  here  no  difference  occurs 
in  the  direction  of  the  induced  current,  and  not  very  much  in 
its  force,  nothing  like  so  much  indeed  as  between  the  current 
induced  in  either  of  these  metals  and  a  metal  taken  from  near 
the  neutral  point  (2399.).  Still  there  is  this  difference  remain- 
ing between  the  conditions  of  the  experiment  and  the  hypo- 
thetical case ;  that  in  the  former  the  induction  is  manifested  by 
currents  in  the  masses,  whilst  in  the  latter,  i.  e.  in  the  special 
magnetic  and  diamagnetic  effects,  the  currents,  if  they  exist,  are 
probably  about  the  particles  of  the  matter. 

2432.  The  magnetic  relation  of  aeriform  bodies  is  exceedingly 
remarkable.  That  oxygen  or  nitrogen  gas  should  stand  in  a 
position  intermediate  between  the  magnetic  and  diamagnetic 
classes ;  that  it  should  occupy  the  place  which  no  solid  or  liquid 
element  can  take ;  that  it  should  show  no  change  in  its  relations 
by  rarefaction  to  any  possible  degree,  or  even  when  the  space  it 
occupies  passes  into  a  vacuum;  that  it  should  be  the  same  mag- 
netically with  any  other  gas  or  vapour ;  that  it  should  not  take 
its  place  at  one  end  but  in  the  very  middle  of  the  great  series  of 
bodies ;  and  that  all  gases  or  vapours  should  be  alike,  from  the 
rarest  state  of  hydrogen  to  the  densest  state  of  carbonic  acid, 
sulphurous  acid,  or  aether  vapour,  are  points  so  striking,  as  to 
persuade  one  at  once  that  air  must  have  a  great  and  perhaps  an 
active  part  to  play  in  the  physical  and  terrestrial  arrangement  of 
magnetic  forces. 

2433.  At  one  time  I  looked  to  air  and  gases  as  the  bi&dies 


Dec.  1845,] 


gaseous  bodies. 


75 


which,  allowing  attenuation  of  their  substance  without  addition, 
would  permit  of  the  observation  of  corresponding  variations  in 
their  magnetic  properties ;  but  now  all  such  power  by  rarefac- 
tion appears  to  be  taken  away ;  and  though  it  is  easy  to  prepare 
a  liquid  medium  which  shall  act  with  other  bodies  as  air  does 
(2422.),  still  it  is  not  truly  in  the  same  relation  to  them;  neither 
does  it  allow  of  dilution,  for  to  add  water  or  any  such  substance 
is  to  add  to  the  diamagnetic  power  of  the  liquid ;  and  if  it  were 
possible  to  convert  it  into  vapour  and  so  dilute  it  by  heat,  it 
would  pass  into  the  class  of  gases  and  be  magnetically  undistin- 
guishable  from  the  rest. 

2434.  It  is  also  very  remarkable  to  observe  the  apparent  dis- 
appearance of  magnetic  condition  and  effect  when  bodies  assume 
the  vaporous  or  gaseous  state,  comparing  it  at  the  same  time 
with  the  similar  relation  to  light ;  for  as  yet  no  gas  or  vapour 
has  been  made  to  show  any  magnetic  influence  over  the  po- 
larized ray,  even  by  the  use  of  powers  far  more  than  enough 
to  manifest  such  action  freely  in  liquid  and  solid  bodies. 

2435.  Whether  the  negative  results  obtained  by  the  use  of 
gases  and  vapours  depend  upon  the  smaller  quantity  of  matter 
in  a  given  volume,  or  whether  they  are  direct  consequences  of 
the  altered  physical  condition  of  the  substance,  is  a  point  of  very 
great  importance  to  the  theory  of  magnetism.  I  have  imagined, 
in  elucidation  of  the  subject,  an  experiment  with  one  of  M. 
Cagniard  de  la  Tour's  aether  tubes,  but  expect  to  find  great 
difficulty  in  carrying  it  into  execution,  chiefly  on  account  of  the 
strength,  and  therefore  the  mass  of  the  tube  necessary  to  resist 
the  expansion  of  the  imprisoned  heated  ather. 

2436.  The  remarkable  condition  of  air  and  its  relation  to 
bodies  taken  from  the  magnetic  and  the  diamagnetic  classes, 
causes  it  to  point  equatorially  in  the  former  and  axially  in  the 
latter.  Or,  if  the  experiment  presents  its  results  under  the  form 
of  attraction  and  repulsion,  the  air  moves  as  if  repelled  in  a  mag- 
netic medium  and  attracted  in  a  medium  from  the  diamagnetic 
class.  Hence  it  seems  as  if  the  air  were  magnetic  when  com- 
pared with  diamagnetic  bodies,  and  of  the  latter  class  when 
compared  to  magnetic  bodies. 

2437.  This  result  I  have  considered  as  explained  by  the  as- 
sumption that  bismuth  and  its  congeners  are  absolutely  repelled 
by  the  magnetic  poles,  and  would,  if  there  were  nothing  else 


76 


Action  of  magnets  on  air  and  gases.  [Series  XXI. 


concerned  in  the  phaenomenon  than  the  magnet  and  the  bismuth, 
be  equally  repelled.  So  also  with  the  iron  and  its  similars,  the 
attraction  has  been  assumed  as  a  direct  result  of  the  mutual  ac- 
tion of  them  and  the  magnets ;  further,  these  actions  have  been 
admitted  as  sufficient  to  account  for  the  pointing  of  the  air  both 
axially  and  equatorially,  as  also  for  its  apparent  attraction  and 
repulsion ;  the  effect  in  these  cases  being  considered  as  due  to 
the  travelling  of  the  air  to  those  positions  which  the  magnetic 
or  diamagnetic  bodies  tended  to  leave. 

2438.  The  effects  with  air  are,  however,  in  these  results  pre- 
cisely the  same  as  those  which  were  obtained  with  the  solutions 
of  iron  of  various  strength  (2365.),  where  all  the  bodies  belonged 
to  the  magnetic  class,  and  where  the  effect  was  evidently  due  to 
the  greater  or  smaller  degree  of  magnetic  power  possessed  by 
the  solutions.  A  weak  solution  in  a  stronger  pointed  equa- 
torially and  was  repelled  like  a  diamagnetic,  not  because  it  did 
not  tend  by  attraction  to  an  axial  position,  but  because  it  tended 
to  that  position  with  less  force  than  the  matter  around  it;  so  the 
question  will  enter  the  mind,  whether  the  diamagnetics,  when  in 
air,  are  repelled  and  tend  to  the  equatorial  position  for  any  other 
reason,  than  that  the  air  is  more  magnetic  than  they  are,  and 
tends  to  occupy  the  axial  space.  It  is  easy  to  perceive  that  if  all 
bodies  Mere  magnetic  in  different  degrees,  forming  one  great 
series  from  end  to  end,  with  air  in  the  middle  of  the  series,  the 
effects  would  take  place  as  they  do  actually  occur.  Any  body 
from  the  middle  part  of  the  series  would  point  equatorially  in 
the  bodies  above  it  and  axially  in  those  beneath  it;  for  the 
matter  which,  like  bismuth,  goes  from  a  strong  to  a  weak  point 
of  action,  may  do  so  only  because  that  substance,  which  is  al- 
ready at  the  place  of  weak  action,  tends  to  come  to  the  place 
where  the  action  is  strong ;  just  as  in  electrical  induction  the 
bodies  best  fitted  to  carry  on  the  force  are  drawn  into  the 
shortest  line  of  action.  And  so  air  in  water,  or  even  under 
mercury,  is,  or  appears  to  be,  drawn  towards  the  magnetic  pole. 

2439.  But  if  this  were  the  true  view,  and  air  had  such  power 
amongst  other  bodies  as  to  stand  in  the  midst  of  them,  then  one 
would  be  led  to  expect  that  rarefaction  of  the  air  would  affect 
its  place,  rendering  it,  perhaps,  more  diamagnetic,  or  at  all 
events  altering  its  situation  in  the  list.  If  such  were  the  case, 
bodies  that  set  equatorially  in  it  in  one  state  of  density,  would. 


Dec.  1845.]    General  nahire  of  diamagnetic  action.  77 

as  it  varied,  change  their  position,  and  at  last  set  axially :  but 
this  they  do  not  do ;  and  whether  the  rarefied  air  be  compared 
with  the  magnetic  or  the  diamagnetic  class,  or  even  with  dense 
air,  it  keeps  its  place. 

2440.  Such  a  view  also  would  make  mere  space  magnetic,  and 
precisely  to  trie  same  degree  as  air  and  gases.  Now  though  it 
may  very  well  be,  that  space,  air  and  gases,  have  the  same 
general  relation  to  magnetic  force,  it  seems  to  me  a  great  addi- 
tional assumption  to  suppose  that  they  are  all  absolutely  mag- 
netic, and  in  the  midst  of  a  series  of  bodies,  rather  than  to  sup- 
pose that  they  are  in  a  normal  or  zero  state.  F or  the  present, 
therefore,  I  incline  to  the  former  view,  and  consequently  to  the 
opinion  that  diamagnetics  have  a  specific  action  antithetically 
distinct  from  ordinary  magnetic  action,  and  have  thus  presented 
us  with  a  magnetic  property  new  to  our  knowledge. 

2441.  The  amount  of  this  power  in  diamagnetic  substances 
seems  to  be  very  small,  when  estimated  by  its  dynamic  effect, 
but  the  motion  which  it  can  generate  is  perhaps  not  the  most 
striking  measure  of  its  force  ;  and  it  is  probable  that  when  its 
nature  is  more  intimately  known  to  us,  other  effects  produced  by 
it  and  other  indicators  and  measurers  of  its  powers,  than  those 
so  imperfectly  made  knovtn  in  this  paper,  will  come  to  our 
knowledge;  and  perhaps  even  new  classes  of  phaenomena  will 
serve  to  make  it  manifest  and  indicate  its  operation.  It  is 
very  striking  to  observe  the  feeble  condition  of  a  helix  when 
alone,  and  the  astonishing  force  which,  in  giving  and  re- 
ceiving, it  manifests  by  association  with  a  piece  of  soft  iron. 
So  also  here  we  may  hope  for  some  analogous  development  of 
this  element  of  power,  so  new  as  yet  to  our  experience.  It  can- 
not for  a  moment  be  supposed,  that,  being  given  to  natural 
bodies,  it  is  either  superfluous  or  insufficient,  or  unnecessary. 
It  doubtless  has  its  appointed  office,  and  that  one  which  relates 
to  the  whole  mass  of  the  globe ;  and  it  is  probably  because  of 
its  relation  to  the  whole  earth,  that  its  amount  is  necessarily  so 
small  (so  to  speak)  in  the  portions  of  matter  which  we  handle 
and  subject  to  experiment.  And  small  as  it  is,  how  vastly 
greater  is  this  force,  even  in  dynamic  results,  than  the  mighty 
power  of  gravitation,  for  instance,  which  bind^  the  whole  uni- 
verse together,  when  manifested  by  masses  of  matter  of  equal 
magnitude  ! 


78   Action  of  matter  in  diamagnetic  phenomena.   [Series  XXL 

2442.  "With  a  full  conviction  that  the  uses  of  this  power  in 
nature  will  be  developed  hereafter,  and  that  they  will  prove,  as 
all  other  natural  results  of  force  do,  not  merely  important  but 
essential,  I  will  venture  a  few  hasty  observations. 

2443.  Matter  cannot  thus  be  affected  by  the  magnetic  forces 
without  being  itself  concerned  in  the  phsenomenon,  and  exert- 
ing in  turn  a  due  amount  of  influence  upon  the  magnetic  force. 
It  requires  mere  observation  to  be  satisfied  that  when  a  magnet 
is  acting  upon  a  piece  of  soft  iron,  the  iron  itself,  by  the  condi- 
tion which  its  particles  assume,  carries  on  the  force  to  distant 
points,  giving  it  direction  and  concentration  in  a  manner  most 
striking.  So  also  here  the  condition  which  the  particles  of  in- 
tervening diamagnetics  acquire,  may  be  the  very  condition  which 
carries  on  and  causes  the  transfer  of  force  through  them.  In 
former  papers  (1161.  &c.)^  I  proposed  a  theory  of  electrical  in- 
duction founded  on  the  action  of  contiguous  particles  with  which 
I  am  now  even  more  content  than  at  the  time  of  its  proposition: 
and  I  then  ventured  to  suggest  that  probably  the  lateral  action 
of  electrical  currents  which  is  equivalent  to  electro-dynamic  or 
magnetic  action,  was  also  conveyed  onwards  in  a  similar  manner 
(1663.  1710.  1729.  1735.).  At  that  time  I  could  discover  no 
pecuhar  condition  of  the  intervening  or  diamagnetic  matter;  but 
now  that  we  are  able  to  distinguish  such  an  action,  so  like  in  its 
nature  in  bodies  so  unlike  in  theirs,  and  by  that  so  like  in  cha- 
racter to  the  manner  in  which  the  magnetic  force  pervades  all 
kinds  of  bodies,  being  at  the  same  time  as  universal  in  its  pre- 
sence as  it  is  in  its  action;  now  that  diamagnetics  are  shown  not 
to  be  indifferent  bodies,  I  feel  still  more  confidence  in  repeating 
the  same  suggestion,  and  asking  whether  it  may  not  be  by  the 
action  of  the  contiguous  or  next  succeeding  particles  that  the 
magnetic  force  is  carried  onwards,  and  whether  the  peculiar 
condition  acquired  by  diamagnetics  when  subject  to  magnetic 
action,  is  not  that  condition  by  which  such  propagation  of  the 
force  is  affected? 

2444.  Whichever  view  we  take  of  solid  and  hquid  substances, 
whether  as  forming  two  lists,  or  one  great  magnetic  class  (2424. 
2437.),  it  will  not,  as  far  as  I  can  perceive,  affect  the  question. 
They  are  all  subject  to  the  influence  of  the  magnetic  lines  of 


'  Philosophical  Transactions,  1838,  Part  I. 


Dec.  1S45.] 


Magnetic  action  of  matter. 


79 


force  passing  through  them,  and  the  vii'tual  difference  in  pro- 
perty and  character  between  any  two  substances  taken  from 
different  places  in  the  list  (2424.)  will  be  the  same ;  for  it  is 
the  differential  relation  of  the  two  which  governs  their  mutual 
effects. 

2445.  It  is  that  group  which  includes  air,  gases,  vapours,  and 
even  a  vacuum  which  presents  any  difficulty  to  the  mind ;  but 
here  there  is  such  a  wonderful  change  in  the  physical  constitu- 
tion of  the  bodies,  and  such  high  powers  in  some  respects  are 
retained  by  them,  whilst  others  seem  to  vanish,  that  we  might 
almost  expect  some  peculiar  condition  to  be  assumed  in  regard 
to  a  power  so  universal  as  the  magnetic  force.  Electric  induc- 
tion being  an  action  through  distance,  is  varied  enough  amongst 
solid  and  liquid  bodies ;  but,  when  it  comes  to  be  exerted  in  air 
or  gases,  where  it  most  manifestly  exists,  it  is  alike  in  amount 
in  all  (1292.);  neither  does  it  vary  in  degree  in  air  however  rare 
or  dense  it  may  be  (1284.).  Now  magnetic  action  may  be  con- 
sidered as  a  mere  function  of  electric  force,  and  if  it  should  be 
found  to  correspond  with  the  latter  in  this  particular  relation 
to  air,  gases,  &c.,  it  would  not  excite  in  my  mind  any  surprise. 

2446.  In  reference  to  the  manner  in  which  it  is  possible  for 
electric  force,  either  static  or  dynamic,  to  be  transferred  from 
particle  to  particle  when  they  are  at  a  distance  from  each  other, 
or  across  a  vacuum,  I  have  nothing  to  add  to  what  I  have  said 
before  (1614,  &c.).  The  supposition  that  such  can  take  place, 
can  present  nothing  startling  to  the  mind  of  those  who  have  en- 
deavoured to  comprehend  the  radiation  and  the  conduction  of 
heat  under  one  principle  of  action. 

2447.  When  we  consider  the  magnetic  condition  of  the  earth 
as  a  whole,  without  reference  to  its  possible  relation  to  the  sun, 
and  reflect  upon  the  enormous  amount  of  diamagnetic  matters 
which,  to  our  knowledge,  forms  its  crust;  and  when  we  remem- 
ber that  magnetic  curves  of  a  certain  amount  of  force  and  uni- 
versal in  their  presence,  are  passing  through  these  matters  and 
keeping  them  constantly  in  that  state  of  tension,  and  therefore 
of  action,  which  I  hope  successfully  to  have  developed,  we  cannot 
doubt  but  that  some  great  purpose  of  utility  to  the  system,  and 
us  its  inhabitants,  is  thereby  fulfilled,  which  now  m  c  shall  have 
the  pleasure  of  searching  out. 

2448.  Of  the  substances  which  compose  the  crust  of  the  earth, 


80 


Terrestrial  d'umiagnetic  action.    [Series  XXI. 


by  far  the  greater  portion  belongs  to  the  diamagnetic  class ;  and 
though  ferruginous  and  other  magnetic  matters,  being  more 
energetic  in  their  action,  are  consequently  more  striking  in  their 
phaenomena,  we  should  be  hasty  in  assuming  that  therefore  they 
overrule  entirely  the  effect  of  the  former  bodies.  As  regards 
the  ocean,  lakes,  rivers,  and  the  atmosphere,  they  will  exert 
their  peculiar  effect  almost  uninfluenced  by  any  magnetic  mat- 
ter in  them;  and  as  respects  the  rocks  and  mountains,  their  dia- 
magnetic influence  is  perhaps  greater  than  might  be  anticipated. 
I  mentioned  that  by  adjusting  water  and  a  salt  of  iron  together, 
I  obtained  a  solution  inactive  in  air  (2422.) ;  that  is,  by  a  due 
association  of  the  forces  of  a  body  from  each  class,  water  and  a 
salt  of  iron,  the  magnetic  force  of  the  latter  was  entirely  coun- 
teracted by  the  diamagnetic  force  of  the  former,  and  the  mix- 
ture was  neither  attracted  nor  repelled.  To  produce  this  effect, 
it  required  that  more  than  48-6  grains  of  crystallized  protosul- 
phate  of  iron  should  be  added  to  10  cubic  inches  of  water  (for 
these  proportions  gave  a  solution  which  still  set  equatorially),  a 
quantity  so  large,  that  I  was  greatly  astonished  on  observing  the 
power  of  the  water  to  overcome  it.  It  is  not  therefore  at  all 
unlikely  that  many  of  the  masses  which  form  the  crust  of  this 
our  globe  may  have  an  excess  of  diamagnetic  power  and  act 
accordingly. 

2449.  Though  the  general  disposition  of  the  magnetic  curves 
which  permeate  and  surround  our  globe  resemble  those  of  a  very 
short  magnet,  and  therefore  give  lines  of  force  rapidly  diverging 
in  their  general  form,  yet  the  magnitude  of  the  system  prevents 
us  from  observing  any  diminution  of  their  power  within  small 
limits ;  so  that  probably  any  attempt  on  the  surface  of  the  earth 
to  observe  the  tendency  of  matter  to  pass  from  stronger  to 
weaker  places  of  action  would  fail.  Theoretically,  however,  and 
at  first  sight,  I  think  a  pound  of  bismuth  or  of  water,  estimated 
at  the  equator,  where  the  magnetic  needle  does  not  dip,  ought  to 
weigh  less  when  taken  into  latitudes  where  the  dip  is  consider- 
able ;  whilst  a  pound  of  iron,  nickel  or  cobalt,  ought,  under  the 
same  change  of  circumstances,  to  weigh  more.  If  such  should 
really  prove  to  be  the  case,  then  a  ball  of  iron  and  another  of 
bismuth,  attached  to  the  ends  of  a  delicate  balance  beam,  should 
cause  that  beam  to  take  different  inclinations  on  different  parts 
jof  the  surface  of  the  earth;  and  it  does  not  seem  quite  impossible 


T>'Ec.  1845.]       Terrestrial  diamaynetic  action. 


81 


that  an  instrument  to  measure  one  of  the  conditions  of  terres- 
trial magnetic  force  might  be  constructed  on  such  a  princijjle. 

2450.  If  one  might  speculate  upon  the  effect  of  the  whole 
system  of  curves  upon  very  large  masses,  and  these  masses  were 
in  plates  or  rings,  then  they  would,  according  to  analogy  with 
the  magnetic  field,  place  themselves  equatorially.  If  Saturn 
were  a  magnet  as  the  earth  is,  and  his  ring  composed  of  dia- 
magnetic  substances,  the  tendency  of  the  magnetic  forces  would 
be  to  place  it  in  the  position  which  it  actually  has. 

2451.  It  is  a  curious  sight  to  see  a  piece  of  wood,  or  of  beef, 
or  an  apple,  or  a  bottle  of  water  repelled  by  a  magnet,  or  taking 
the  leaf  of  a  tree  and  hanging  it  up  between  the  poles,  to  observe 
it  take  an  equatorial  position.  Whether  any  similar  effects  oc- 
cur in  nature  among  the  myriads  of  forms  which,  upon  all  parts 
of  its  surface,  are  surrounded  by  air,  and  are  subject  to  the  action 
of  lines  of  magnetic  force,  is  a  question  which  can  only  be  an- 
swered by  future  observation. 

2452.  Of  the  interior  of  the  earth  we  know  nothing,  but  there 
are  many  reasons  for  beheving  that  it  is  of  a  high  temperature.  On 
this  supposition  I  have  recently  remarked,  that  at  a  certain  di- 
stance from  the  surface  downwards,  magnetic  substances  must  be 
entirely  destitute,  either  of  the  power  of  retaining  magnetism,  or 
becoming  magnetic  by  induction  from  currents  in  the  crust  or 
otherwise  1.  This  is  evidently  an  error;  that  the  iron,  &c.  can 
retain  no  magnetic  condition  of  itself,  is  very  probably  true,  but 
that  the  magnetic  metals  and  all  their  compounds  retain  a 
certain  power  of  becoming  magnetic  by  induction,  whatever 
their  temperature,  has  now  been  proved  (2344,  &c.).  The 
deep  magnetic  contents  of  the  earth,  therefore,  though  they  pro- 
bably do  not  constitute  of  themselves  a  central  magnet,  are  just 
m  the  condition  to  act  as  a  very  weak  iron  core  to  tlie  currents 
around  them,  or  other  inducing  actions,  and  very  likely  are 
highly  important  in  this  respect.  What  the  effect  of  the  dia- 
magnetic  part  may  be  under  the  influence  of  such  inductive 
forces,  we  are  not  prepared  to  state ;  but  as  far  as  I  have  been 
able  to  observe,  such  bodies  have  not  their  power  diminished  by 
heat  (2397.). 

2453.  If  the  sun  have  anything  to  do  with  the  magnetism  of 
the  globe,  then  it  is  probable  that  part  of  its  effect  is  due  to  the 

'  Philosophical  Magazine,  1845,  vol.  xxvii.  p.  3. 
VOL.  HI.  „ 


82 


Terrestrial  magnetic  action.       [Series  XXI. 


action  of  the  light  that  comes  to  us  from  it ;  and  in  that  expec- 
tation the  air  seems  most  strikingly  placed  round  our  sphere, 
investing  it  with  a  transparent  diamagnetic,  which  therefore, 
is  permeable  to  his  rays,  and  at  the  same  time  moving  with 
great  velocity  across  them.  Such  conditions  seem  to  suggest 
the  possibility  of  magnetism  being  there  generated ;  but  1  shall 
do  better  to  refrain  from  giving  expression  to  these  vague 
thoughts  (though  they  will  press  in  upon  the  mind),  and  first 
submitting  them  to  rigid  investigation  by  experiment,  if  they 
prove  worthy,  then  present  them  hereafter  to  the  Royal  Society. 

Royal  Institution, 
Dec.  22,  1845. 


Feb.  2,  1846. — I  add  the  following  notes  and  references  to 
these  Researches. 

Brugmans  first  observed  the  repulsion  of  bismuth  by  a  magnet  in  1778.  An- 
tonii  Brugmans  Magnetismus  seu  de  affinitatibus  magneticis  ohservationes  magne- 
ticce.   Lugd.  Batav.  1778,  §  41. 

M.  le  Baillif  on  the  Repulsion  of  a  Magnet  by  Bismuth  and  Antimony, 
Bulletin  Universel,  1827,  vol.  vii.  p.  371  ;  vol.  viii.  pp.  87,  91,  94. 

Saigey  on  the  Magnetism  of  certain  natural  combinations  of  Iron,  and  on 
the  mutual  repulsions  of  Bodies  in  general.    Ibid.  1828,  vol.  ix.  pp.  89,  167, 

239.  ,  : 

Seebeck  on  the  Magnetic  Polarity  of  " different  Metals,  Alloys  and  Oxides. 

Ibid.  1828,  vol.  ix.  p.  175. 


83 


TWENTY-SECOND  SERIES 

§  28.  On  the  Crystalline  polarity  of  bismuth  {and  other  bodies), 
and  on  its  relation  to  the  magnetic  form  of  force.    ^  i.  Cry- 

.  stalline  polarity  of  bismuth.  ^  ii.  Crystalline  polarity  of  an- 
timony.   ^  iii.  Crystalline  polarity  of  arsenic. 

Received  October  4,— Read  December  7,  1848. 

2454.  Many  results  obtained  by  subjecting  bismuth  to  the 
action  of  the  magnet  have  at  various  times  embarrassed  me,  and 
I  have  either  been  contented  with  an  imperfect  explanation,  or 
have  left  them  for  a  future  examination  :  that  examination  I 
have  now  taken  up,  and  it  has  led  to  the  discovery  of  the  follow- 
ing results.  I  cannot,  however,  better  enter  upon  the  subject 
than  by  a  brief  description  of  the  anomalies  which  occurred, 
and  which  may  be  obtained  at  pleasure. 

2455.  If  a  small  open  glass  tube  have  a  bulb  formed  in  its 
middle  part  and  some  clean  good  bismuth  be  placed  in  the  bulb 
and  melted  by  a  spirit-lamp,  it  is  easy  afterward,  by  turning 
the  metal  into  the  tubular  part  of  the  arrangement,  to  cast  it 
into  long  cyUnders :  these  are  very  clean,  and  when  broken  are 
seen  to  be  crystallized,  usually  giving  cleavage  planes,  which 
run  across  the  metal.  I  prepare  them  from  0-05  to  0*1  of  an 
inch  in  diameter,  and,  if  the  glass  be  thin,  usually  break  both  it 
and  the  bismuth  together,  and  then  keep  the  little  cyhnders  in 
their  vitreous  cases. 

2456.  Taking  some  of  these  cylinders  at  random  and  suspend- 
ing them  horizontally  between' the  poles  of  the  electro-magnet 
(2247.),  they  presented  the  following  phfenomena.  The  first 
pointed  axially ;  the  second,  equatorially ;  the  third,  equatorial 
m  one  position,  and  obliquely  equatorial  if  turned  round  on  its 
axis  50°  or  60° ;  the  fourth,  equatorially  and  axially  under  the 
same  treatment  ;  and  all  of  them,  if  suspended  perpendicularly, 
pomted  well,  vibrating  about  a  final  fixed   position  which 

'  Philosophical  Transactions  1849,  p.  1.    The  Bakerian  Lecture. 

G  2 


84  Crystalline  polarity  of  bismuth.    [Series  XXII. 

seemed  to  have  no  reference  to  the  form  of  the  cyHndcrs.  In 
all  these  cases  the  bismuth  was  strongly  diamagnetic  (2295,  &c.), 
being  repelled  by  a  single  magnetic  pole,  or  passing  off  on  either 
side  from  the  axial  line  between  two  poles.  A  similar  piece  of 
finely-grained  or  granular  bismuth  was,  under  the  same  circum- 
stances and  at  the  same  time,  affected  in  a  perfectly  regular 
manner,  taking  up  the  equatorial  position  (2253.),  as  a  body 
simply  diamagnetic  ought  to  do.  The  cause  of  these  variations 
was  finally  traced  to  the  regularly  crystalline  condition  of  the 
metallic  cylinders. 

^  i.  Crystalline  polarity  of  bismuth. 

2457.  Some  bismuth  was  crystallized  in  the  usual  manner  by 
melting  it  in  a  clean  iron  ladle,  allowing  it  partly  to  congeal,  and 
then  pouring  away  the  internal  fluid  portion.  Pieces  so  obtained 
were  then  broken  up  by  copper  hammers  and  tools,  and  groups 
of  the  crystals  separated,  each  group  or  piece  consisting  only  of 
those  crystals  which  were  symmetrically  arranged,  and  therefore 
likely  to  act  in  one  direction.  If  any  part  of  the  fragments  had 
been  in  contact  with  the  iron  ladle,  it  was  cleared  away  by  rub- 
bing on  sandstone  and  sand-paper.  Pieces  weighing  from  18  ' 
grains  to  100  grains  were  thus  easily  obtained. 

2458.  The  electro-magnet  employed  in  the  first  instance  was 
that  already  described  (224?,),  having  moveable  terminations 
which  supplied  either  conical,  round,  or  flatfaced  poles.  That 
the  suspension  of  the  bismuth  might  be  readily  effected  and  un- 
objectionable as  to  magnetic  influence,  the  following  arrangement 
was  generally  adopted.    A  single  fibre  of  cocoon  silk,  from  12 
to  24  inches  in  length,  was  attached  to  a  fit  support  above,  and 
made  fast  below  to  the  end  of  a  piece  of  fine,  straight,  well-cleaned 
copper  wire,  about  2  inches  in  length  ;  the  lower  end  of  this  wire 
was  twisted  up  into  a  little  head,'and  then  furnished  with  a  pellat 
of  cement,  made  by  melting  together  a  portion  of  pure  white 
wax,  with  about  one-fourth  its  weight  of  Canada  balsam.  The 
cement  was  soft  enough  to  adhere  by  pressure  to  any  dry  sub- 
stance, and  sufficiently  hard  to  sustain  weights  up  to  300  grains, 
or  even  more.  When  prepared,  the  suspender  was  subjected  by 
itself  to  the  action  of  the  magnet,  to  ascertain  that  it  was  free 
from  any  tendency  to  point,  or  be  affected ;  without  which  pre- 


Oct.  1848.]        Crystalline  pularity  of  bismuth.  85 

caution  no  confidence  could  be  reposed  in  the  results  of  the  ex- 
periments. 

2459.  A  piece  of  selected  bismuth  (2457.)>  weighing  25  grains 
was  hung  up  between  the  poles  of  the  magnet,  and  moved  with 
o-reat  freedom.    The  constituent  cubes  were  associated  in  the 

to 

usual  manner,  being  attached  to  each  other  chiefly  in  the  line 
joining  two  opposite  solid  angles ;  and  this  line  was  in  the  greatest 
length  of  the  piece.  The  instant  that  the  magnetic  force  was  on, 
the  bismuth  vibrated  strongly  about  a  given  line,  in  which,  at 
last,  it  settled ;  and  if  moved  out  of  that  position,  it  returned, 
when  at  liberty,  into  it;  pointing  with  considerable  force,  and 
having  its  greatest  length  axial. 

2460.  Another  piece  was  then  selected,  having  a  flatter  form, 
which  when  subjected  to  the  magnetic  power,  pointed  with  the 
same  facility  and  force,  but  its  greatest  length  was  equatorial : 
still  the  line  according  to  which  the  cubes  tended  to  associate 
diametrally,  was,  as  before,  in  the  axial  direction.  Other  pieces 
were  then  taken  of  different  forms,  or  shaped  into  various  forms 
by  rubbing  them  down  on  stone,  but  they  all  pointed  well ;  and 
took  up  a  final  position,  which  had  no  reference  to  the  shape, 
but  was  manifestly  dependent  on  the  crystalline  condition  of  the 
substance. 

2461.  In  all  these  cases  the  bismuth  was  diamagnetic,  and 
strongly  repelled  by  either  magnetic  pole,  or  from  the  axial  line. 
It  was  affected  only  whilst  the  magnetic  force  was  present.  It 
set  in  a  given  constant  position  perfectly  determinate ;  and,  if 
moved,  always  returned  to  it,  unless  the  extent  of  motion  was 
above  90°,  and  then  the  piece  moved  further  round  and  took  up 
a  new  position  diametrically  opposed  to  the  former,  which  it  then 
retained  with  equal  force,  and  in  the  same  manner.  This  phe- 
nomenon is  general  in  all  the  results  I  have  to  refer  to,  and  I 
will  express  it  by  the  word  diametral : — diametral  set  or  position. 

2462.  The  effect  occurs  with  a  single  magnetic  pole,  and  it  is 
then  striking  to  observe  a  long  piece  of  a  substance,  so  diamag- 
netic as  bismuth,  repelled,  and  yet  at  the  same  moment  set 
round  with  force,  axially  or  end  on,  as  a  piece  of  magnetic  sub- 
stance would  do. 

2463.  Whether  the  magnetic  poles  employed  (2458.)  are 
pointed,  round,  or  flatfaced,  still  the  effect  on  the  bismuth  is  the 
same :  nevertheless,  the  form  of  the  poles  has  an  important  in- 


86         Magnecrystallic  polarity  of  bismuth.     [Series  XXII. 

fluence  of  a  subordinate  kind ;  and  some  forms  are  much  more 
fitted  for  these  investigations  than  others.    When  pointed  poles 
are  employed,  the  lines  of  magnetic  force  (2149.)  rapidly  diverge, 
and  the  force  itself  diminishes  in  intensity  to  the  middle  distance 
from  each  pole.    But  when  flatrfaced  poles  are  used,  though  the 
lines  of  power  are  curved  and  vary  in  intensity  at  and  towards 
the  edges  of  the  flat  faces,  yet  there  is  a  space  at  the  middle  of 
the  magnetic  field  where  they  may  be  considered  as  parallel  to 
the  magnetic  axes,  and  of  equal  force  throughout.    If  the  flat 
faces  of  the  poles  be  square  or  circular,  and  their  distance  apart 
about  one-third  of  their  diameter,  this  space  of  uniform  power  is 
of  considerable  extent.    In  my  experience  the  central  or  axial 
portion  of  the  magnetic  field  is  sensibly  weaker  than  the  circum- 
jacent parts  ;  but,  then,  there  is  a  small  screw-hole  in  the  middle 
of  each  pole  face,  for  the  attachment  of  other  forms  of  termi- 
nation. 

2464.  Now  the  law  of  action  of  bismuth,  as  a  diamagnetic 
body,  is,  that  it  tends  to  go  from  stronger  to  weaker  places  of 
magnetic  force  (2267-  2418.);  but  as  a  magnecrystallic  body  it 
is  subject  to  no  effect  of  the  kind ;  and  is  as  powerfully  affected 
by  lines  of  equal  force  as  by  any  other.  So  a  piece  of  amor- 
phous  bismuth,  suspended  iu  a  magnetic  field  of  uniform  power, 
seems  to  have  lost  its  diamagnetic  force  altogether,  and  tends  to 
acquire  no  motion  but  what  is  due  to  torsion  of  the  suspending 
fibre,  or  currents  of  air:  but  a  piece  of  regularly  cijstalhzed 
bismuth  is,  in  the  same  situation,  very  powerfully  affected  by 
virtue  of  its  magnecrystallic  condition.  .  „ 

2465  Hence  the  great  value  of  a  magnetic  field  of  uniform 
force  •  and,  if,  hereafter,  in  the  extension  of  these  investigations 
to  bodies  having  only  a  small  degree  of  crystamne  PO^er  a  per- 
fectly uniform  field  should  be  required,  it  could  easily  be  given 
by  making  the  form  of  the  pole  face  somewhat  convex,  and 
.ounded  a!  the  edges  more  or  less.  The  required  shape  could 
be  ascertained  by  calculation,  or  perhaps  better  in  practi  e  by 
the  use  of  a  little  test  cylinder  of  bismuth  in  the  granular  or 
amorphous  state,  or  of  phosphorus. 

2466  In  addition  to  these  observations,  it  may  be  remarked 
that  small  crystals,  or  masses  of  crystals,  and  such  as  approach 

n  their  general  shape  to  that  of  a  cube  or  a  sphere,  are  better 
han  arg'e  or  elongated  pieces;  inasmuch,  as  if  there  be  irregu- 


Oct.  1848.]     Magnea'ystallic  polarity  of  bismuth.  87 

lai-ities  in  the  force  of  a  magnetic  field,  such  pieces  are  less  Ukely 
to  be  affected  by  them. 

2467.  When  the  crystal  of  bismuth  is  in  a  magnetic  field  of 
equal  strength,  it  is  equally  affected  whether  it  be  in  the  middle 
of  the  field  or  close  up  to  one  or  the  other  magnetic  pole ;  i.  e. 
the  number  of  vibrations  in  equal  times  appears  to  be  equal. 
Much  care,  however,  is  required  in  estimating  it  by  such  means, 
because,  from  the  occurrence  of  two  positions  of  unstable  equili- 
brium in  the  equatorial  direction,  the  vibrations  in  large  arcs  are 
much  slower  than  those  in  small  arcs ;  and  it  is  difficult  in  dif- 
ferent cases  to  adjust  them  to  the  same  extent  of  vibration. 

2468.  Whether  the  bismuth  be  in  a  field  of  intense  magnetic 
force  or  one  of  feeble  powers ;  whether  the  magnetic  poles  are 
close  up  to  the  piece,  or  are  opened  out  until  they  are  five  or  six 
inches  or  even  a  foot  asunder ;  whether  the  bismuth  be  in  the 
line  of  maximum  force,  or  raised  above,  or  lowered  beneath  it ; 
whether  the  electric  current  be  strong  or  weak,  and  the  mag- 
netic force,  therefore,  more  or  less  in  that  respect ;  if  the  bismuth 
be  affected  at  all  it  is  always  affected  in  the  same  manner. 

2469.  The  results  are,  altogether,  very  different  from  those 
produced  by  diamagnetic  action  (2418.).  They  are  equally  di- 
stinct from  those  discovered  and  described  by  Plucker,  in  his 
beautiful  researches  into  the  relation  of  the  optic  axis  to  mag- 
netic action  ;  for  there  the  force  is  equatorial,  whereas  here  it  is 
axial.  So  they  appear  to  present  to  us  a  new  force,  or  a  new 
form  of  force,  in  the  molecules  of  matter,  which,  for  convenience 
sake,  1  will  conventionally  designate  by  a  new  word,  as  the  mag- 
necrystallic  force. 

2470.  The  direction  of  this  force  is,  in  relation  to  the  mag- 
netic fieldj  axial  and  not  equatorial :  this  is  proved  by  several 
considerations.  Thus,  when  a  piece  of  regularly  crystallized  bis- 
muth was  suspended  in  the  magnetic  field,  it  pointed ;  keeping  it 
in  this  position,  the  point  of  suspension  was  removed  90°  in  the 
equatorial  plane  (2252.),  so  that  when  again  freely  suspended, 
the  line  through  the  crystal,  which  was  before  horizontal  in  the 
equatorial  plane,  was  now  vertical ;  the  piece  again  pointed,  and 
generally  with  more  force  than  before.  The  line  passing  through 
the  crystal,  coincident  with  the  magnetic  axis,  may  now  be  taken 
as  a  line  of  force ;  and  if  the  process  of  a  quarter  revolution  in 
the  equatorial  plane  be  repeated,  however  often,  the  crystal  still 


B8  MagnecrystalUc polarity  of  bismuth.     [Series  XXII. 

continues  to  point  with  the  assumed  Une  of  force  in  the  mag- 
netic axis,  and  with  a  maximum  degree  of  power.  But  now,if  the 
point  of  suspension  be  removed  90°  in  the  plane  of  the  axis,  i.  e. 
to  the  end  of  the  assumed  hne  of  force,  so,  that  when  the  crystal 
is  again  freely  suspended  this  line  is  vertical ;  then,  the  crystal 
presents  its  peculiar  effect  at  a  minimum,  being  almost  or  en- 
tirely devoid  of  pointing  power,  and  exhibits  in  relation  to  the 
magnet,  only  the  ordinary  diamagnetic  force  (2418.)- 

2471.  Now  if  the  power  had  been  equatorial  and  polar,  its 
maximum  effect  would  not  have  been  produced  by  a  change  of 
the  point  of  suspension  through  90°  in  the  equatorial  plane,  but 
by  the  same  change  in  the  axial  plane,  and  any  similar  change 
after  that  in  the  axial  plane,  would  not  have  disturbed  the 
maximum  force ;  whereas  a  single  change  of  90°  in  the  equa- 
torial plane,  would  have  brought  the  line  of  force  vertical  (as  in 
Piiicker's  case  of  Iceland  spar),  and  reduced  the  results  to  a 
minimum  or  zero. 

2472.  The  directing  force,  therefore,  and  the  set  of  the 
crystal  are  in  the  axial  direction.  This  force  is,  doubtless,  resi- 
dent in  the  particles  of  the  crystal.    It  is  such,  that  the  crystal 
can  set  with  equal  readiness  and  permanence  in  two  diametral 
positions  ;  and  that  between  these  there  are  two  positions  of 
equatorial  equilibrium,  which  are,  of  course,  unstable  in  their 
nature.    Either  end  of  the  mass  or  of  its  molecules,  is,  to  all 
intents  and  purposes,  both  in  these  phaenomena,  and  in  the  ordi- 
nary results  of  crystalization,  like  the  other  end ;  and  in  many 
cases,  therefore,  the  words  axial  and  axiality  would  seem  more 
expressive  than  the  words  polar  and  polarity.  .  In  presentmg 
the  ideas  to  my  own  mind,  I  have  found  the  meaning  belongmg 
to  the  former  words  the  more  useful. 

2473.  On  placing  the  metal  in  other  positions,  and  therefore 
in  a  constrained  condition,  no  alteration  of  the  state  or  power 
of  the  bismuth,  either  in  force  or  direction,  is  produced  by  the 
power  of  the  magnet,  however  strong  its  enforcement  or  long 

its  continuance.  .  . 

2474.  It  is  difficult  readily  to  describe  the  position  of  this 
force  in  relation  to  the  crystal,  though  most  easy  to  ascertain  it 
experimentally.  The  form  of  the  bismuth  crystals  is  said  to  be 
that  of  a  cube,  and  of  its  primitive  particle  a  regular  octohedron. 
To  me  the  crystals  do  not  seem  to  be  cubes,  but  either  rhomboids 


Oct.  1848.]     Form  and  cleavage  of  bismuth  crystals.  89 

or  rhombic  prisms,  approaching  very  nearly  to  cubes.  My 
measurements  were  very  imperfect  and  the  crystals  not  regular ; 
but  as  an  average  of  several  observations,  the  planes  were  in- 
clined to  each  other  at  angles  of  91  i°  and  88^°;  and  the  bound- 
ary lines  of  a  plane  at  87^°  and  92^°.  Whatever  be  the  true 
form,  it  is  manifest,  upon  inspection,  that  the  aggregating  force 
tends  to  produce  crystals  having  more  or  less  of  the  rhomboidal 
shape  and  rhombic  planes  ;  and  that  these  crystals  run  together 
in  symmetric  groups,  generally  in  the  direction  of  their  longest 
diameters.  Now  the  line  of  magnecrystallic  force  almost  always 
coincides  with  this  direction  where  the  latter  is  apparent. 

2475.  The  cleavage  of  bismuth  crystals  removes  the  solid 
angles  and  replaces  them  by  planes;  so  that  there  are  four 
directions  producing  the  octohedron.  These  cleavages  are  not 
(in  my  experience)  made  with  equal  facility,  nor  do  they  pro- 
duce planes  equally  bright  and  perfect.  Two,  and  more  fre- 
quently one,  of  these  planes  is  more  perfect  than  the  others ; 
and  this,  the  most  perfect  plane,  is  that  which  is  produced  at 
the  most  acute  solid  angle  (2474.) ;  and  is  generally  easily 
recognized.  When  a  bismuth  crystal  presents  many  planes  of 
cleavage  and  is  suspended  in  the  magnetic  field,  one  of  these 
planes  faces  towards  one  of  the  magnetic  poles,  and  its  corre- 
sponding plane,  if  it  be  there,  towards  the  other ;  so  that  the  line 
of  magnecrystallic  force  is  perpendicular  to  this  plane  :  and  this 
plane  corresponds  to  the  one  which  I  have  already  described  as 
being,  generally,  the  most  perfect,  and  replacing  the  acute 
angle  of  the  crystal. 

2476.  A  single  crystal  of  bismuth  was  selected  and  cut  out 
from  the  mass  by  copper  tools,  and  the  places  where  it  had 
adhered  were  rubbed  down  on  sand-paper,  so  as  to  give  the 
fragment  a  cube-like  form  with  six  planes  ;  four  of  these  planes 
were  natural.  One  of  the  solid  angles,  expected  to  be  that 
terminating  or  in  the  direction  of  the  line  of  magnecrystallic 
force,  was  removed,  so  as  to  expose  a  small  cleavage  plane,  which 
was  bright  and  perfect,  as  also  was  expected.  When  suspended 
in  the  magnetic  field  with  this  plane  vertical,  the  crystal  in- 
stantly pointed  with  considerable  force,  and  with  the  plane  to- 
wards either  one  or  the  other  magnetic  pole  ;  so  that  the  magne- 
crystallic axis  appeared  now  to  be  horizontal  and  acting  with  its 
greatest  power.    When  this  axial  line  was  made  vertical,  and 


90 


Law  of  magnecrystallic  action.     [Series  XXII. 


the  plane  therefore  horizontal,  the  position  being  carefully  ad- 
justed, the  crystal  did  not  point  at  all.  Being  now  suspended 
in  succession  at  all  the  angles  and  faces  of  the  cube,  it  always 
pointed  with  more  or  less  force;  but  always  so  that  a  line 
drawn  perpendicularly  through  the  indicating  cleavage  plane 
(representing  therefore  the  line  of  force)  was  in  the  same  vertical 
plane  as  that  including  the  magnetic  axis  :  and,  finally,  when 
the  bright  cleavage  plane  was  horizontal  and  the  line  of 
directive  force  therefore  vertical,  inclining  it  a  little  in  a  give^. 
direction  would  make  any  given  part  of  the  crystal  point  to  the 
magnetic  poles. 

2477.  A  group  of  bismuth  crystals,  the  apex  of  which  was 
terminated  by  a  single  small  cleavage  facet,  was  found  to  give 
the  same  results. 

247s.  Occasionally  groups  of  crystals  (2457.)  occurred  which 
did  not  seem  capable  of  being  placed  in  some  one  position  in 
which  they  lost  all  directive  power,  but  seemed  to  retain  a  mini- 
mum degree  of  force.  It  is  very  unlikely,  however,  that  all  the 
groups  should  be  perfectly  symmetric  in  the  arrangement  of 
their  parts.  It  is  more  surprising  that  they  should  be  so 
distinct  in  their  action  as  they  are.  In  reference  to  bismuth, 
and  many  other  bodies,  it  is  probable  that  magnetic  force  will 
give  a  more  important  indication  in  relation  to  the  essential  and 
real  crystaUine  structure  of  the  mass  than  its  form  can  do. 

2479.  I  have  already  stated  that  the  magnecrystallic  force 
does  not  manifest  itself  by  attraction  or  repulsion,  or,  at  least, 
does  not  cause  approach  or  recession,  but  gives  position  only. 
The  law  of  action  appears  to  be,  that,  the  line  or  axis 
of  MAGNECRYSTALLIC /o?Te  (being  the  resultant  of  the  action 
of  all  the  molecules),  tends  to  place  itself  parallel,  or  as  a 
tangent,  to  the  magnetic  curve  or  line  of  magnetic  force,  passing 
through  the  place  where  the  crystal  is  situated. 


2480.  I  now  broke  up  masses  of  bismuth  which  had  been 
melted  and  solidified  in  the  ordinary  way,  and,  selecting  those 
fragments  which  appeared  to  be  most  regularly  crystallized,  sub- 
mitted them  to  experiment.  It  was  almost  impossible  to  take  a 
small  piece  which  did  not  obey  the  magnet  and  point  more  or 


Oct.  1848.]  Action  of  bismuth  plates.  91 

less  readily.  By  selecting  the  thin  plates  with  perfect  cleavage 
planes,  I  readily  obtained  specimens  which  corresponded  in  all 
respects  with  the  crystals ;  but  thicker  plates  or  angular  pieces 
often  proved  complicated  in  the  results,  though  apparently 
simple  and  regular  as  to  form.  Occasionally,  the  cleavage 
plane,  which  I  have  beforehand  taken  for  that  perpendicular  to 
the  hue  of  force  (2475.),  has  proved  not  to  be  the  plane  sup- 
posed ;  but,  after  observing  experimentally  the  direction  of  the 
magnecrystallic  power,  I  have  always  either  found,  or  else  ob- 
tained by  cleavage,  a  plane  corresponding  to  it,  possessing*  the 
appearance  and  character  before  described  (2475.).  Bismuth 
plates  from  the  one-twentieth  to  the  one-tenth  of  an  inch  in 
thickness,  and  bounded  by  parallel  and  similar  planes,  when 
broken  up,  often  proved,  upon  ocular  examination,  to  be  com- 
pounded and  irregular. 

2481.  When  a  well-selected  plate  of  bismuth  (mine  are  about 
0'3  of  an  inch  in  length  and  breadth,  and  0  05,  more  or  less,  in 
thickness)  is  hung  up  by  the  edge  in  the  magnetic  field,  it  vi- 
brates and  points,  presenting  its  faces  to  the  magnetic  poles, 
and  setting  diametrally  (2461.).  By  whatever  part  of  the  edge 
it  is  suspended,  the  same  results  follow.  But  if  it  be  suspended 
horizontally,  the  cleavage  planes  of  the  fragment  and  of  the  mag- 
netic axis  being  parallel  to  the  plane  of  motion  of  the  plate, 
then  it  is  perfectly  indifferent;  for  then  the  line  of  magnecrys- 
tallic force  is  perpendicular  to  the  line  of  magnetic  force  in  every 
position  that  it  can  take. 

2482.  But  if  the  plate  be  inclined  only  a  very  small  quantity 
from  this  position,  it  points,  and  that  with  more  force  as  the 
planes  become  moi'e  nearly  vertical  (2475.) ;  and  the  pheenomena 
before  described  with  a  crystal  (2476.),  can  here  be  obtained 
with  a  fragment  from  a  mass,  and  any  part  of  the  edge  of  the 
plate  made  to  point  axially,  by  elevating  or  depressing  it  above 
or  below  the  horizontal  plane. 

2483.  If  a  number  of  these  crystalline  plates  be  selected  at  the 
magnet,  they  may  afterwards  be  built  up  together,  with  a  little 
good  cement  (2458.),  into  a  mass  which  has  perfectly  regular 
magnecrystaUic  action ;  and  in  that  respect  resembles  the  crys- 
tals before  spoken  of  (2459.  2468.  2476.).  In  this  manner, 
also,  the  diamagnetic  effect  of  the  bismuth  may  be  neuti'alized ; 
for  it  is  easy  to  build  up  a  prism  whose  breadtli  and  thickness 


92 


Maynecrystallic  action  of  bismuth.     [Series  XXII. 


are  equal,  and  this  being  hung  with  the  length  vertical,  points 
w  ell  and  without  any  interference  of  diamagnetic  action. 

2484.  By  placing  three  equal  plates  at  right  angles  to  each 
other,  a  system  is  obtained,  which  has  lost  all  power  of  pointing 
under  the  influence  of  the  magnet,  the  force  being,  in  every 
direction,  neutralized.  This  represents  the  case  of  finely  crys- 
tallized or  amorphous  bismuth.  The  same  result  (having  the 
same  nature)  may  be  obtained  by  taking  a  selected  uniform  mass 
of  crystals  (2457.)5  melting  it  in  a  glass  tube  and  resolidifying 
it :  unless  the  crystallization  is  large  and  distinct,  which  rarely 
happens,  the  piece  obtained  is  apparently  without  magnecrys- 
tallic  force.  A  like  result  is  also  obtained  by  breaking  up  the 
crystal  and  putting  the  small  fragments  or  powder  into  a  tube, 
and  submitting  the  whole  to  the  force  of  the  magnet. 


2485.  These  experiments  on  bismuth  are  not  difficult  of  repe- 
tition ;  for,  except  those  M'hich  require  the  sudden  production 
or  cessation  of  the  magnetic  force,  the  whole  may  be  repeated 
with  an  ordinary  horse-shoe  magnet.  A  magnet,  with  which  I 
have  wrought  considerably,  consists  of  seven  bars  placed  side  by 
side,  and  being  fixed  in  a  box  with  the  poles  upwards,  presents 
two  magnet  cheeks,  an  inch  and  a  quarter  apart,  between  which 
is  the  magnetic  field,  having  the  lines  of  force  in  a  horizontal 
direction.  The  poles  of  the  magnet  should  be  covered,  each 
with  paper,  to  prevent  communication  of  particles  of  iron  or 
rust.  The  best  place  for  the  piece  of  bismuth  is,  of  course, 
between  the  poles  ;  not  level,  however,  with  their  tops,  but  from 
0*4  to  1-0  inch  lower  down  (2463.),  that  the  eflfect  of  flat-faced 
poles  may  be  obtained.  If  it  be  desired  to  strengthen  the  lines 
of  magnetic  force,  this  may  be  done  by  introducing  a  piece  of 
iron  between  the  poles  of  the  magnet,  and  so,  by  virtually 
causing  them  to  approach,  lessen  the  width  of  the  magnetic  field 
between  them. 

2486.  The  magnet  I  used  would  sustain  30  lbs.  at  the 
keeper ;  but  employing  small  pieces  of  bismuth,  I  have  easily 
obtained  the  eflfects  with  magnets  weighing  themselves  not  more 
than  7  ounces,  and  able  to  sustain  only  22  ounces  j  so  that  the 
experiments  are  within  the  reach  of  every  one. 


Oct.  1848.] 


Disturbing  irifiuence  of  iron. 


9.3 


2487.  Whilst  the  crystal  of  bismuth  is  in  the  mafz;netic  field, 
it  is  alFeeted  very  distinctly,  and  even  strongly,  by  the  near  ap- 
proximation of  soft  iron  or  magnets,  and  after  the  following 


Fig.  1. 


manner.  Let  fig.  1  represent  in 
plan  the  position  of  the  two  chief 
magnetic  poles,  and  of  a  piece  of 
crystallized  bismuth  between  them, 
which,  by  its  magnecrystallic  con- 
dition, points  axially.  Then,  if  a 
piece  of  soft  iron  be  applied 
against  the  cheek  of  the  pole,  as 

at  e,  and  also  near  to  the  bismuth,  as  at  a,  it  will  affect  the 
latter  and  cause  its  approach  to  the  iron.  If  the  iron  be  ap- 
plied in  a  similar  manner  at  /,  g,  or  h,  it  will  have  a  like  result 
in  causing  motion  of  the  bismuth:  and  the  parts  marked  b,  c, 
and  d,  will  in  turn  approach  it,  seeming  to  be  attracted.  If 
the  soft  iron  do  not  touch  the  magnetic  pole,  but  be  held 
between  it  and  the  bismuth  so  as  to  represent  generally  the 
same  positions,  the  same  effects,  but  in  a  weaker  degree,  are 
produced. 

2488.  Though  these  motions  seem  to  indicate  an  effect  of 
attraction,  I  do  not  believe  them  to  be  due  to  any  such  cause, 
but  simply  to  the  influence  of  the  law  of  action  (2479.)  before 
expressed.  The  previously  uniform  condition  of  the  magnetic 
field  is  destroyed  by  the  presence  of  the  iron  ;  lines  of  magnetic 
force,  of  greater  intensity  than  the  others,  proceed  from  the 
angle  a  of  the  iron  in  the  position  represented,  or  from  the  cor- 
responding angles  in  the  other  positions  (the  shape  of  the  pole 
now  approximating  more  or  less  to  the  conical  or  pointed  form), 
and  therefore  the  crystal  of  bismuth  moves  round  on  the  axis  of 
suspension,  that  it  may  place  the  line  of  magnecrystallic  force 
parallel  or  as  a  tangent  to  the  resultant  of  the  magnetic  forces 
which  pass  through  its  mass. 

2489.  When  in  place  of  the  group  of  crystals  a  crystalline 
plate  of  bismuth  (2481.)  is  em- 
ployed, the  appearances  produced 
under  similar  circumstances,  are 
those  of  repulsion;  for  if  fig.  2 
be  allowed  to  represent  this  state 
of  things,  the  piece  of  iron  applied 
•at  e  causes  the  plate  to  recede 


94      Dislurbiny  influence  of  iron  and  magnets.  [Series  XXII. 


from  it  at  a,  or  if  applied  '<iif,g,  or  h,  it  causes  recession  of  the 
bismuth  from  it  at  the  points  h,  c,  and  d.  Now  though  these 
effects  look  like  repulsion,  they  are,  as  I  conclude,  nothing  more 
than  the  consequences  of  the  endeavour  which  the  bismuth 
makes  under  the  law  before  expressed  (2479.)?  to  place  the  mag- 
necrystallic  line  of  force  parallel  to,  or  as  a  tangent  to  the 
resultant  of  magnetic  force  passing  through  the  bismuth. 

2490.  A  piece  of  iron  wire  about  li  inch  long,  and  0*1  or  0-2 
of  an  inch  thick,  being  held  in  the  equatorial  plane  to  the  edge 
of  the  plate  (fig.  3),  did  not 
alter  its  position ;  but  if  the 
end  e  were  inclined  to  either 
pole,  the  plate  began  to  move, 
and  moved  most  when  the 
iron  touched  the  pole  as  in  the 
figure.  When  it  approached 
or  touched  the  N  pole,  the  in- 
clination of  the  crystal  plate  of 
bismuth  was  as  indicated  by 

the  dotted  figure.  When  it  touched  the  S,  the  inclination  was 
the  contrary  way.  If  the  end  e  were  kept  in  contact  wdth  the 
N  pole,  and  the  other  end  of  the  soft  iron  rod  placed  in  the 
position  m,  the  bismuth  was  not  affected ;  but  if  then  this  sub- 
sidiary pole  were  moved  the  one  way  or  the  other  towards  the 
edge  of  the  plate,  the  latter  turned  as  the  pole  moved,  always 
tending  to  keep  its  face  towards  it,  and  evidently  by  the 
tendency  of  the  magnecrystallic  axis  to  place  itself  parallel 
to  the  resultant  of  magnetic  force  passing  through  the 
bismuth.  The  same  results  were  obtained  w4th  the  crystal 
(2487.)  under  similar  circumstances,  and  corresponding  results 
were  obtained  when  the  soft  iron  rod  was  applied  between  the 
S  cheek  of  the  magnet  and  the  bismuth.  The  like  effects  were 
also  obtained  with  plates  of  arsenic  and  antimony. 

2491.  When  a  magnet  is  used  instead  of  soft  iron,  corre- 
sponding effects  are  produced ;  only  it  must  be  remembered,  that 
if  the  chief  magnet  be  very  powerful,  it  may  often  neutralize, 
and  even  change,  the  magnetism  of  the  small  approximated 
magnet;  and  this  can  happen  with  the  latter  (as  to  external  in- 
fluence), whilst  in  the  magnetic  field,  even  though  when  with- 
drawn it  may  appear  to  remain  unaltered. 

2492.  Thus,  when  the  plate  of  bismuth  was  suspended  be- 


Oct.  1848.]      On  the  magnetic  field  of  force. 


95 


tween  the  cheeks  of  the  horse- shoe  magnet  (2485.),  fig.  2,  and 
the  north  pole  of  a  small  magnet  (the  blade  of  a  pocket-knife) 
was  placed  at  a  or  b,  it  caused  recession  of  the  part  of  the  bis- 
muth near  it,  and  precisely  for  the  same  reasons  as  those  that 
existed  when  the  soft  iron  was  there.  When  the  extra  pole  was 
placed  at  c  or  d,  the  action  was  more  feeble  than  in  the  former 
case,  and  consisted  in  an  approximation  of  that  part  of  the  bis- 
muth to  the  pole.  As  this  position  of  the  subordinate  pole 
would  terminate  and  neutralize  certain  of  the  lines  of  magnetic 
force  proceeding  from  the  south  pole  of  the  horse-shoe  magnet, 
so  the  resultant  of  the  lines  of  force  passing  through  the 
bismuth  would  be  changed  in  direction,  being  rendered  oblique 
to  their  former  course,  and  precisely  in  the  manner  represented 
by  the  motion  of  the  bismuth,  in  its  tendency  to  place  its  line 
of  force  parallel  with  them  in  their  new  position. 

2493.  An  approximated  south  pole  caused  motions  in  the 
contrary  direction. 

2494.  When  the  subordinate  pole  was  applied  to  the  edge  of 
the  plate,  the  little  magnet  being  in  the  equatorial  position  (fig. 
3),  then  instead  of  being  neutral,  as  the  iron  was,  it  caused  the 
plate  to  move  in  a  tangential  direction,  either  to  the  right  or  the 
left,  according  as  it  was  either  a  south  or  a  north  pole,  just  in- 
deed as  the  iron  did  when,  by  inclining  it,  the  approximated  end 
became  a  pole  (2490.).  This  effect  was  shown  in  a  still  more 
striking  degree  by  using  the  crystal  of  bismuth  (2487.),  because^ 
from  its  form  and  position  the  magnetic  curves  most  affected  by 
the  extra  pole  were  more  included  in  the  bismuth  than  when  the 
plate  was  used. 

2495.  Innumerable  variations  of  these  motions  may  be  caused, 
and  appearances  of  attraction  or  repulsion,  or  tangential  action 
be  obtained  at  pleasure  by  the  use  of  crystals  having  the  mag- 
necrystallic  axis  corresponding  with  their  length,  or  plates  where 
it  accords  with  their  thickness  ;  and  either  permanent  or  tempo- 
rary subsidiary  magnetic  poles.  By  making  the  moveable  pole 
travel  slowly  round  the  bismuth  from  the  neutral  point  m  to  the 
other  neutral  point  n,  fig.  3,  a  summary  of  the  whole  can  be  ob- 
tained, and  it  is  found  that  they  all  resolve  themselves  into 
the  general  law  before  expressed  (2479.) ;  the  magnecrystallic 
axis  and  the  resultant  of  magnetic  force  passing  through  the 
bismuth,  tending  to  become  parallel, 

2496.  Hence  a  small  crystal  or  plate  of  bismuth  (or  arsenic 


96         Crystals  of  bismuth  in  various  media.    [Series  XXII. 


(2532.))  may  become  a  very  useful  and  important  indicator  of 
the  direction  of  the  Hnes  of  force  in  a  magnetic  field,  for  at  the 
same  time  that  it  takes  up  a  position  showing  their  course,  it 
does  not  by  its  own  action  tend  sensibly  to  disturb  them. 

2497.  Many  of  these  motions  are  similar  to,  and  have  relation 
with,  those  described  by  Pliicker,  Reich,  and  others,  as  ob- 
tained by  the  action  of  iron  and  magnets  on  bismuth,  in  its  simple 
diamagnetic  condition.  These  results  are  by  them  and  others  con- 
sidered as  indicating  that  the  bismuth,  as  I  had  originally  sup- 
posed (2429,  &c.),  has  really,  in  its  diamagnetic  state,  a  magnetic 
condition  the  reverse  of  that  of  iron.  I  am  not  acquainted  with 
all  of  them,  or  with  the  reasoning  thereon  (being  in  the  German 
language)  ;  but  such  as  I  am  aware  of,  and  have  reobtained, 
seem  to  me  to  be  simple  results  of  the  Jaw  I  formerly  laid  down 
(2267.  2418.),  namely,  that  diamagnetic  bodies  tend  to  proceed 
from  stronger  to  weaker  places  of  magnetic  force ;  and  give  no 
additional  or  other  proof  of  the  assumed  reverse  polarity  of  bis- 
muth than  the  former  cases  of  action  which  I  had  given,  coming 
under  that  law. 


2498.  Supposing  that  the  intervening  or  surrounding  matter 
might,  in  some  manner,  affect  the  magnecrystallic  action  of  bis- 
muth and  other  bodies,  I  fixed  the  magnetic  poles  at  a  given 
distance  (about  two  inches)  asunder,  suspended  a  crystal  of  bis- 
muth in  the  middle  of  the  magnetic  field,  and  observed  its  vibra- 
tions and  set.  Then,  without  any  other  change,  I  introduced 
screens  of  bismuth,  being  blocks  about  two  inches  square  and 
0'75  of  an  inch  in  thickness,  between  the  poles  and  the  crystal, 
but  I  could  not  perceive  that  any  change  in  the  phcEnomena  was 
produced  by  their  presence. 

2499.  The  bismuth  crystal  (2459.)  was  suspended  in  water 
between  the  magnetic  poles  of  the  horse-shoe  magnet.  It  set 
.well  in  accordance  with  the  general  law  (2479. )i  and  it  took  five 
revolutions  of  the  torsion  index  at  the  upper  end  of  the  sus- 
pending silk  filament  to  displace  it,  and  cause  it  to  turn  into  the 
diametral  position.  This  is,  as  well  as  I  could  observe  the 
results,  the  same  amount  of  torsion  force  required  to  effect  its 
displacement  when  the  crystal  was  placed  in  the  same  position, 
but  surrounded  with  air  only. 

2500.  The  same  bismuth  was  then  suspended  in  a  saturated 


Oct.  184R.]  Bismuth  crystallized  in  the  magnetic  field.  97 


solution  of  protosulphate  of  iron  (adapted  as  a  magnetic  medium), 
it  set  as  before  with  apparently  no  change  of  any  kind ;  and 
when  the  torsion  force  was  put  on,  it  still  required  five  turns  of 
the  index,  as  before,  to  cause  the  displacement  of  the  crystal, 
and  its  passage  into  the  diametral  position. 

2501.  Whether  therefore  crystals  of  bismuth  be  immersed  in 
air,  or  water,  or  solution  of  sulphate  of  iron,  or  placed  between 
thick  masses  of  bismuth,  if  they  be  subject  to  the  same  magnetic 
force,  the  magnecrystalhc  force  exerted  by  them  is  the  same  both 
in  nature,  direction  and  amount. 


2502.  It  seemed  possible  and  probable  that  magnetic  force 
might  affect  the  crystallization  of  bismuth,  if  not  of  other  bodies. 
For,  as  the  force  affects  the  mass  of  a  crystal  by  that  power 
■which  its  particles  possess,  and  which  they  give  to  the  crystal 
as  a  whole  by  their  polar  (or  axial  (2472.))  and  symmetric  con- 
dition ;  and,  as  the  final  position  of  the  crystalline  mass  in  the 
magnetic  field  may  be  considered  as  that  of  the  least  constraint, 
so  it  was  likely  enough  that,  if  the  bismuth  in  a  fluid  state  were 
placed  under  the  influence  of  the  magnetism,  the  individual 
particles  would  tend  to  assume  one  and  the  same  axial  condition, 
and  the  crystalline  arrangement  and  direction  of  the  mass 
upon  its  solidification,  be  in  some  degree  determined  and  under 
government. 

2503.  Some  bismuth,  therefore,  was  fused  in  a  glass  tube  and 
held  in  a  fixed  position  in  the  strong  magnetic  field  Until  it  had 
become  solid ;  then,  being  removed  from  the  glass,  it  was  sus- 
pended so  that  it  might  assume  the  same  position  under  the  in- 
fluence of  the  magnet ;  but  no  signs  of  magnecrystallic  force 
were  evident.  It  was  not  expected  that  the  whole  would  become 
regularly  crystallized,  but  that  a  difference  between  one  direc- 
tion and  another  might  appear.  Nothing  of  the  kind  however 
occurred,  whatever  the  direction  in  which  the  piece  was  sus- 
pended; and  when  it  was  broken  open,  the  crystallization 
within  was  found  to  be  small,  confused,  and  in  all  directions. 
Perhaps  if  longer  time  were  allowed,  and  a  permanent  magnet 
used,  a  better  result  might  be  obtained.  I  had  built  many 
hopes  upon  the  process,  in  reference  to  the  crystalline  condition 

VOL.  III.  ,  „ 


98  Magnecrystallic  action.      [SEftiES  XXII. 

of  gold,  silver,  platina,  and  the  metals  generally,  and  also  in 
respect  of  other  bodies. 


2504.  I  cannot  find  that  crystals  of  bismuth  acquire  any 
power,  either  temporary  or  permanent,  which  they  can  bring 
away  from  the  magnetic  field.  1  held  crystals  in  different  posi- 
tions in  the  field  of  intense  action  of  a  powerful  electro-magnet, 
having  conical  terminations  very  near  to  each  other ;  and,  after 
some  time,  removed  them  and  applied  them  instantly  to  a  very 
delicate  astatic  magnetic  needle ;  but  I  could  not  perceive  that 
they  had  the  least  extra  effect  upon  it,  because  of  such  treatment. 

2505.  As  a  crystal  of  bismuth  is  subject  to,  and  obeys  the 
influence  of,  the  lines  of  magnetic  force  (2479.),  so  it  follows 
that  it  ought  to  obey  even  the  earth's  action,  and  point,  though 
with  a  very  feeble  degree  of  power.  I  have  suspended  a  good 
crystal  by  a  long  filament  of  cocoon  silk,  and  sheltered  it  as  well 
as  I  could  from  currents  of  air  by  concentric  glass  tubes,  and  I 
think  have  observed  indications  of  a  set  or  pointing.  The  cry- 
stal was  so  hung  that  the  magnecrystallic  axis  made  the  same 
angle  wdth  the  horizontal  plane  (about  70°)  as  the  magnetic  dip, 
and  the  indication  was,  that  the  axis  and  the  dip  tended  to  coin- 
cide :  but  the  experiments  require  careful  repetition. 

2506.  A  more  important  point,  ag  to  the  nature  of  the  polar 
or  axial  forces  of  bismuth,  is  to  know  whether  two  crystals,  or 
uniformly  crystallized  masses  of  bismuth,  can  mutually  affect 
each  other ;  and  if  so,  what  the  nature  of  these  affections  are  ? 
what  is  the  relation  of  the  equatorial  and  terminal  parts?  and 
what,  the  direction  of  the  forces?  I  have  made  many  experi- 
ments, in  relation  to  this  subject,  both  in  and  out  of  the  mag- 
netic field,  but  obtained  only  negative  results.  I  employed  how- 
ever small  masses  of  bismuth,  and  it  is  my  purpose  to  repeat 
and  extend  them  at  a  more  convenient  season  with  larger  masses, 
built  up,  if  necessary,  in  the  manner  already  described  (2483.). 

2507-  I  need  hardly  say  that  a  crystal  of  bismuth  ought  to 
point  in  a  helix  or  ring  of  wire  carrying  an  electric  current,  and 
so  that  its  magnecrystallic  axis  should  be  parallel  to  the  axis  of 
the  ring  or  helix.    This  I  find  experimentally  to  be  the  case. 


Oct.  1848.]      Crystalline  polurity  of  antimony. 


99 


^  ii.  Crystalline  Polarity  of  Antimony. 

2508.  Antimony  is  a  magnecrystallic  body.  Some  crystalline 
masses,  procured  in  the  manner  before  described  (245  7- were 
broken  up  with  copper  tools,  and  some  excellent  groups  of  cry- 
stals were  obtained,  weighing  from  ten  to  twenty  grains  each,  in 
which  all  the  constituent  crystals  appeared  to  be  uniformly 
placed.  The  individual  crystals  were  very  good  on  the  whole, 
and  much  more  frequently  complete  and  full  at  the  faces  than 
those  of  bismuth.  They  were  very  bright,  having  a  steel-gray  or 
silvery  appearance,  and  to  the  eye  appeared  more  surely  as  cubes 
than  bismuth,  though  here  and  there  distinctly  rhomboidal  faces 
presented  themselves.  Planes  of  cleavage  can  be  made  to  re- 
place the  solid  angles ;  and,  as  with  bismuth,  there  is  one  plane 
generally  brighter  and  more  perfect  than  the  others. 

2509.  In  the  first  place,  it  was  ascertained  that  all  these  cry- 
stals were  diamagnetic  and  strongly  so. 

2510.  In  the  next  it  was  ascertained,  as  with  bismuth,  that 
all  of  them  exhibited  the  magnecrystallic  phsenomena  with  con- 
siderable power,  showing  the  existence  of  a  line  of  force  (2470.); 
which,  when  placed  vertically,  left  the  crystal  free  to  move  in 
any  direction  (2476.) ;  but  when  placed  horizontally,  caused  the 
crystal  to  point,  and  in  so  doing  took  up  its  own  position  parallel 
to  the  resultant  of  magnetic  force  passing  through  the  crystal 
(2479.).  This  line  proceeded,  as  in  bismuth,  from  one  of  the 
solid  angles  to  the  opposite  one,  and  was  perpendicular  to  the 
bright  cleavage  plane  just  spoken  of  (2508.). 

2511.  So,  generally,  the  action  of  the  magnet  upon  these 
crystals  was  the  same  as  upon  the  crystals  of  bismuth ;  but  there 
are  some  points  of  variation  which  require  to  be  more  distinctly 
stated  and  distinguished. 

2512.  In  the  first  place,  when  the  magnecrystallic  axis  was 
horizontal,  and  a  certain  crystal  used,  upon  the  evolution  of  the 
magnetic  force,  the  crystal  went  up  to  its  position  slowly,  and 
pointed,  as  with  a  dead  set.  If  the  crystal  were  moved  from 
this  position  on  either  side,  it  returned  to  it  at  once  :  there  was 
no  vibration.  Other  crystals  did  the  same  imperfectly;  and 
others  again  made  one  or  perhaps  two  vibrations,  but  all  ap- 
peared as  if  they  were  moving  in  a  thick  fluid,  and  were,  in  that 
respect,  utterly  unlike  bismuth,  in  the  freedom  and  mobiUty 
with  which  it  vibrated  (2459.). 

H  2 


100 


Magnecrystallic  action.      [Series  XXII. 


2513.  In  the  next  place,  when  the  crystals  were  so  suspended 
as  to  have  the  magnecrystallic  axis  vertical,  there  was  no  point- 
ing nor  any  other  signs  of  magnecrystallic  force ;  but  other  ap- 
pearances presented  themselves.  For,  if  the  crystalline  mass 
was  revolving  when  the  magnetic  force  was  excited,  it  suddenly 
stopped,  and  was  caught  in  a  position  which  might,  as  was  found 
by  experience,  be  any  position ;  but  if  the  greatest  length  was 
out  of  the  axial  or  equatorial  position,  the  arrest  was  followed  by 
a  revulsive  motion  on  the  discontinuance  of  the  electric  current 
(2315.).  This  revulsive  motion  was  never  great,  but  was  most 
when  the  length  of  the  mass  formed  about  an  angle  of  45°  with 
the  axis  of  the  magnetic  field. 

2514.  On  further  examination  it  appeared  that  this  arresting 
and  revulsive  effect  was  precisely  the  same  in  kind  as  that  ob- 
served on  a  former  occasion  with  copper  and  other  metals 
(2309.),  and  due  to  the  same  cause,  namely,  the  production  of 
circular  electric  currents  in  the  metal  under  the  inductive  force 
of  the  magnet.  Now,  the  reason  appeared  why,  in  the  former 
case,  the  crystals  of  antimony  did  not  oscillate  (2512.);  and 
why,  also,  they  went  up  to  their  position  of  rest  with  a  dead  set ; 
for  the  currents  produced  by  the  motion  are  just  those  which 
tend  to  stop  the  motion  (2329.)*;  and  though  the  magnecry- 
stallic force  was  sufficient  to  make  the  crystal  move  and  point, 
yet  the  very  motion  so  produced  generated  the  current  which 
reacted  upon  the  tendency  to  motion,  and  so  caused  the  mass  to 
advance  towards  its  position  of  rest  as  if  it  moved  in  a  thick  fluid. 

2515.  Having  this  additional  knowledge  respecting  the  arrest 
and  revulsion  of  the  antimony,  (effects  dependent  upon  its 
superior  conducting  power,  in  this  compact  crystalline  state,  as 
compared  with  bismuth,)  one  has  no  difficulty  in  identifying  the 
magnecrystallic  force  of  this  metal  with  that  of  the  former,  and 
establishing  the  correspondence  of  the  results  in  all  essential 
characters  and  particulars.    In  most  of  the  pieces  of  crystals  of 

*  Any  one  who  wishes  to  form  a  sufficient  idea  of  the  arresting  powers  of 
these  induced  currents,  should  take  a  lump  of  solid  copper,  approaching  to  the 
cubical  or  globular  form,  weighing  from  a  quarter  to  half  a  pound;  should 
suspend  it  by  a  long  thread,  give  it  a  rapid  rotation,  and  then  introduce  it, 
spinning,  into  the  magnetic  field  of  the  electro-jnagnet ;  he  will  find  its  motion 
to  be  instantly  stopped  ;  and  if  he  further  tries  to  spin  it,  whilst  in  the  field, 
will  find  it  impossible  to  do  so. 


Oct.  1848.]  Revulsive  action  of  antimony  crystals,  101 

antimony  the  force  seemed  less  than  in  bismuth,  but  the  fact 
may  not  really  be  so,  for  the  inductive  current  action  just 
described  tends  to  hide  the  magnecrystallic  phajnomena. 

2516.  Different  pieces  of  antimony  also  seem  to  differ  from 
each  other  in  their  setting  force,  and  also  in  their  tendency  to 
exhibit  revulsive  effects;  but  these  differences  are  either  only 
apparent,  or  may  easily  be  explained.  The  arresting  and  revul- 
sive action  depends  much  upon  the  continuity  of  the  mass,  so 
that  one  large  piece  shows  it  much  better  than  several  small 
pieces,  and  these  again  better  than  a  powdered  substance.  Even 
the  revulsive  action  of  copper  may  be  entirely^estroyed  by  re- 
ducing the  single  lump  to  filings.  It  is  easy  to  perceive,  there- 
fore, that  of  two  groups  of  antimony  crystals,  each  symmetrically 
disposed  within  itself,  the  one  may  have  larger  crystals  well 
connected  together,  as  regards  the  induction  of  currents  through 
the  whole  mass,  and  the  other  smaller  crystals  less  favourably 
united.  These  would  present  very  different  appearances,  as  re- 
gards the  arrest  of  motion  and  succeeding  revulsive  action ; 
and  further,  on  that  very  account,  would  differ  in  their  readiness 
to  present  the  magnecrystallic  phaenomena,  though  they  might 
possess  precisely  equal  degrees  of  that  force. 

2517.  On  proceeding  to  experiment  with  plates  of  antimony, 
further  illustrations  of  the  effects  resulting  from  the  causes  just 
described  were  obtained,  with  abundant  accompanying  evidence 
of  the  existence  of  the  magnecrystallic  condition  in  the  metal. 
The  plates  were  selected  from  broken  masses,  as  with  bismuth 
(2480.).  Some  were  soon  found  which  acted  simply,  instantly, 
and  well;  their  large  surfaces  were  bright  cleavage  planes. 
When  suspended  by  any  part  of  the  edge,  these  planes  faced 
towards  the  magnetic  poles  ;  and  the  plate  oscillated  on  each 
side  of  its  final  position,  gradually  acquiring  its  state  of  rest. 

2518.  When  these  plates  were  suspended  with  their  planes 
horizontal,  they  had  no  power  of  pointing  in  the  magnetic  field. 
When  they  were  inchned,  the  points  which  were  most  depressed 
below  and  raised  above  the  horizontal  plane,  were  those  which 
took  up  their  places  nearest  the  magnetic  poles  (2482.). 

2519.  When  several  plates  were  arranged  together  into  a  con- 
sistent bundle  (2483.),  the  diamagnetic  effect  was  removed,  and 
the  magnecrystallic  oscillation  and  pointing  became  very  ready 
a  characteristic. 


102 


Magnecrystallic  action.       [Series  XXIL 


2520.  Thus  it  is  evident  that,  in  all  these  cases,  there  was  a 
line  of  magneci'ystalhc  force  perpendicular  to  the  planes  of  the 
plates,  and  perfectly  consistent  in  its  position  and  action  with 
the  force  before  found  in  the  solid  crystals  of  antimony. 

2521.  But  another  plate  of  antimony  was  now  selected,  which 
had  every  appearance  of  being  able  to  present  all  the  phae- 
nomena  of  the  former  plates ;  and  yet,  when  hung  up  by  its 
edge,  it  showed  no  signs  of  magnecrystallic  results ;  for  it  first 
advanced  a  little  (2310.),  then  was  arrested  and  kept  in  its 
place,  and  if  standing  between  the  axial  and  equatorial  positions, 
was  revulsed  whfen  the  battery  current  was  interrupted,  exhibit- 
ing effects  equal  to  those  of  copper  (2315.).  Many  other  plates 
were  tried  with  precisely  the  same  result. 

2522.  When  this  plate  (2521.)  was  placed  in  the  field  of  in- 
tense power  between  two  conical  magnetic  poles,  it  exhibited 
the  same  phaenomena;  but  notwithstanding  the  arresting  action, 
it  moved  slowly  until  it  stood  in  the  equatorial  position  ;  a 
result  which  was  probably  due  to  the  exertion  of  both  magne- 
crystallic and  diamagnetic  force.  When  the  plate  was  suspended 
with  its  planes  horizontal,  the  arresting  and  revulsive  actions 
were  gone  ;  fo^"  the  induced  currents  which  before  caused  them 
could  not  now  exist  in  the  necessary  vertical  plane ;  further,  it 
had  no  setting  power,  which  showed  that  there  was  no  axis  of 
magnecrystallic  force  in  the  length  or  breadth  of  the  plates. 

2523.  Other  plates  were  then  found  able  to  produce  mixed 
effects,  and  those  in  different  degrees.  Thus,  some,  like  the  first, 
vibrated  freely,  pointed  well,  and  presented  no  indication  of  the 
arrest  and  revulsive  phaenomena.  Others  vibrated  sluggishly, 
set  well,  and  showed  a  tendency  to  be  arrested.  Others  pointed 
well,  going  up  to  their  place  with  a  dead  set,  but  moving  as  if 
in  a  fluid ;  or,  if  the  magnetic  force  were  taken  off  before  the 
piece  had  settled,  it  was  revulsed  feebly :  and  others  M'ere  caught 
at  once,  did  not  set  (within  the  time  of  my  observation),  and 
were  strongly  revulsed. 

2524.  Finally,  a  careful  investigation,  carried  on  by  means 
both  of  the  horse-shoe  (2485.)  and  the  great  electro-magnet 
(2247.),  made  the  cause  of  these  differences  in  the  effects  ap- 
parent. 

2525.  It  may  be  observed,  in  the  first  place,  that  sometimes  a 
plate  of  antimony  being  selected  (25 17-)^  having  planes  very 


Oct.  1848.]  Omrents  induced  in  crystals  of  antimony.  103 

bright  and  perfect  in  their  appearance,  and,  therefore,  giving 
reason  to  think  that  it  may  point  well  in  the  magnetic  field, 
when  submitted  to  the  horse-shoe  magnet  does  not  do  so  ;  but 
points  obliquely,  feebly,  and  perhaps  in  two  undiametral  posi- 
tions. This  is,  I  have  no  doubt,  because  the  crystaUization  is 
complicated  and  confused.  Such  a  plate,  if  it  be  sufficiently 
broad  and  long  (i.  e.  not  less  than  a  quarter  or  one-third  of  an 
inch),  when  submitted  to  the  electro-magnet,  will  show  the 
arresting  (2310.)  and  revulsive  (2315.)  action  well. 

2526.  In  the  next  place,  we  have  to  remember  that,  for  the 
development  of  the  induced  currents  which  cause  the  arresting 
and  revulsive  action,  the  plate  must  have  certain  sufficient 
dimensions  in  a  vertical  plane  (2329.).  The  currents  occur  in 
the  mass  and  not  round  the  separate  particles  (2329.),  and  the 
resultant  of  the  magnetic  lines  of  force  passing  through  the  sub- 
stance, is  the  axis  round  which  these  currents  are  produced. 
Hence  the  reason  why  the  effect  does  not  occur  with  plates  sus- 
pended in  the  horizontal  position,  which  yet  produce  it  well  in 
the  vertical  position;  a  result  which  a  disc  half  an  inch  in 
diameter  of  thin  foil  or  plate,  being  copper,  silver,  gold,  tin,  or 
almost  any  malleable  metal,  will  show ;  though  the  best  con- 
ductors are  the  fittest  for  the  purpose.  Now  this  condition  is 
of  no  consequence  in  respect  of  magnecrystallic  action,  and  a 
narrow  plate  has  as  much  force  as  a  broad  one,  having  the  same 
mass.  The  first  plate  that  I  happened  to  select  (2517-)  was  well 
crystallized,  thick  and  narrow;  hence  it  was  favourable  for 
magnecrystallic  action,  unfavourable  to  the  arresting  and  revul- 
sive action,  and  showed  no  signs,  comparatively,  of  the  latter 

2527.  When  a  broad  and  well-crystallized  plate  is  obtained, 
then  both  sets  of  effects  appear  :  thus,  if  the  plate  is  revolving 
when  the  magnetic  force  is  brought  into  action,  it  quickens  its 
velocity  for  an  instant,  then  is  stopped ;  and  if  the  magnetic 
force  is  at  once  taken  off,  it  is  revulsed,  exactly  as  a  piece  of 
copper  would  be  (2315.).  But  if  the  magnetic  force  be  continued, 
it  will  then  be  perceived  that  the  stop  is  only  apparent ;  for  the 
plate  moves,  though  with  a  greatly  reduced  velocity,  and  con- 
tinues to  move  until  it  has  taken  up  its  magnecrystallic  position. 
It  moves  as  if  in  a  thick  fluid.  Hence  the  magnecrystallic  force 
is  there  and  produces  its  full  effect ;  and  the  reason  why  the 
appearances  have  changed  is,  that  the  very  motion  which  the 


104 


Magnecrystallic  action.       [Series  XXII 


force  tends  to  give,  and  does  give  to  the  mass,  causes  those 
magneto-electric  currents  (2329.)  which  by  their  mutual  action 
M'ith  the  magnet  tends  to  stop  the  motion  ;  and  therefore  its 
slowness  and  the  final  dead  set  (2512.  2523.). 

2528.  A  magnet  which  is  weaker  (as  the  horse-shoe  instru- 
ment described  (2485.))  produces  the  currents  by  induction  in 
a  much  weaker  degree,  and  yet  manifests  the  magnecrystallic 
power  well ;  hence  it  is  more  favourable,  under  certain  circum- 
stances, for  such  investigations  j  as  it  helps  to  distinguish  the 
one  effect  from  the  other. 

2529.  It  will  readily  be  seen  that  plates,  whether  of  the  same 
metal  or  of  dift'erent  metals,  cannot,  even  roughly,  be  com- 
pared with  each  other  as  to  magnecrystallic  force  by  their  vibra- 
tions ;  for  under  the  influence  of  these  induced  currents,  plates 
of  the  same  magnecrystallic  force  oscillate  in  very  different 
manners.  I  took  a  plate,  and  by  cement  (2458.)  attached  selected 
paper  to  its  faces,  and  then  observed  how  it  acted  in  the  mag- 
netic field ;  it  set  slowly,  and  it  showed  the  arresting  and  revul- 
sive effects  (2521.).  1  then  pressed  it  in  a  mortar,  so  as  to 
break  it  up  into  many  parts,  which  still  kept  their  place ;  and. 
now  it  set  more  freely  and  quickly,  and  showed  very  little  of  the 
revulsive  action. 

2530.  Though  the  indication  by  vibration  is  thus  uncertain, 
the  torsion  force  still  remains  to  us,  I  beUeve,  a  very  accurate 
indication  of  the  strength  of  the  set  (2500.),  and,  therefore,  of 
the  degree  of  the  magnecrystallic  force;  and  though  the  sus- 
pending silk  fibre  may  give  way  a  little,  a  glass  thread,  accord- 
ing to  Ritchie's  suggestion,  would  answer  perfectly. 

2531.  Antimony  must  be  a  good  conductor  of  electricity  in 
the  direction  of  the  plates  of  the  crystals,  or  it  would  not  give, 
so  freely,  these  indications  of  revulsive  action.  The  groups  of 
crystals  of  antimony  (2508.)  showed  the  effect  in  such  a  degree, 
as  to  make  me  think  that  the  constituent  cubes  possessed  the 
power  nearly  equally  in  all  directions.  A  piece  of  finely  cry- 
stallized or  granular  antimony  does  not,  however,  show  it  in  the 
same  proportion ;  from  which  it  would  seem,  as  if  an  effect  equi- 
valent in  some  degree  to  that  of  division  occurs,  either  at  the 
meeting  of  two  incongruous  crystals,  or  between  the  contiguous 
plates  of  the  crystals,  and  affects  the  conducting  pow  er  in  these 
directions. 


Oct.  1848.]       Crystalline  polarity  of  arsenic. 


105 


•|[  iii.  Crystalline  Polarity  of  Arsenic. 

2532.  A  mass  of  the  metal  arsenic  exhibiting  crystalline 
structure  (2480.) ?  was  broken  up,  and  several  plates  selected 
from  the  fragments,  having  good  cleavage  plane  surfaces,  about 
0-3  of  an  inch  in  length,  O'l  inch  in  width,  and  0'03  in  thick- 
ness. These,  when  suspended  opposite  one  conical  pole,  proved 
to  be  perfectly  diamagnetic ;  and  when  before  it  or  between  two 
poles  strongly  magnecrystallic.  I  have  a  pair  of  flat-faced  poles 
with  screw-holes  in  the  centre  of  the  faces,  and  these  so  much 
•weaken  the  intensity  of  the  lines  of  magnetic  force  about  the 
middle  of  the  field,  when  the  faces  are  within  half  an  inch  of 
each  other,  that  a  cylinder  of  granular  bismuth  0*3  in  length 
sets  axially,  or  from  pole  to  pole  (2384.).  But  with  the  plates 
of  arsenic  between  the  same  poles  there  was  no  tendency  of  this 
kind;  so  much  was  the  magnecrystallic  force  predominant  over 
the  diamagnetic  force  of  the  substance. 

2533.  When  the  plates  of  arsenic  were  suspended  with  their 
planes  horizontal,  then  they  did  not  point  at  all  between  the 
flat-faced  poles.  Any  inclination  of  the  planes  to  the  horizontal 
line  produced  pointing,  with  more  or  less  force  as  the  planes 
approached  more  or  less  to  the  vertical  position,  exactly  in  the 
manner  already  described  in  relation  to  bismuth  and  antimony 
(2482.  2518.). 

2534.  Thus,  arsenic  with  bismuth  and  antimony  are  found  to 
possess  the  magnecrystallic  force  or  condition. 

Royal  Institution, 
September  23,  1848. 


106 


TWENTY-SECOND  SERIES  {continued)\ 

§  28.  On  the  crystalline  polarity  of  bismuth  and  other  bodies, 
and  on  its  relation  to  the  magnetic  and  electric  form  of  force 
[continued).  ^  iv.  Crystalline  condition  of  various  bodies. 
If  V.  Nature  of  the  magnecrystallic  force,  and  general  obser- 
vations. 

Received  October  31, — Read  December  7,  1848. 

1[  iv.  Crystalline  condition  of  various  bodies. 

2535.  Zinc. — Plates  of  zinc  broken  out  of  crystallized  masses 
gave  irregular  indications^  and,  being  magnetic  from  the  impu- 
rity in  them,  the  effects  might  be  due  entirely  to  that  circum- 
stance. Pure  zinc  was  thrown  down  electro-chemically  on 
platina  from  solutions  of  the  chloride  and  the  sulphate.  The 
former  occurred  in  ramifying  dendritic  associations  of  small  cry- 
stal ;  the  latter  in  a  compact  close  form.  Both  were  free  from 
magnetic  action  and  freely  diamagnetic,  but  neither  showed  any 
trace  of  the  magnecrystallic  action. 

2536.  Titanium'^. — Some  good  crystals  of  titanium  obtained 
from  the  bottom  of  an  iron  furnace,  were  cleansed  by  the  alter- 
nate action  of  acids  and  fluxes  until  as  clear  from  iron  as  I  could 
procure  them.  They  were  bright,  well-formed  and  magnetic 
(2371)^  and  contained  iron,  I  think,  diffused  through  their  whole 
mass,  for  nitromuriatic  acid,  by  long  boiling,  continually  re- 
moved titanium  and  iron  from  them.  These  crystals  had  a  cer- 
tain magnetic  property  which  I  am  inclined  to  refer  to  their 
crystalline  condition.  When  between  the  poles  of  the  electro- 
magnet, they  set ;  and  when  the  electric  current  was  discon- 
tinued, they  still  set  between  the  poles  of  the  enfeebled  magnet 
as  they  did  before.  If  left  to  itself,  a  crystal  always  took  the 
same  position,  showing  that  it  was  constantly  rendered  magnetic 

J  Philosophical  Transactions,  1849,  p.  19. 

^  For  these  and  many  other  crystals  I  am  indebted  to  the  kindness  of  Sir 
Henry  T.  De  la  Beche  and  Mr.  Tcnnant. 


Oct.  1848.]  Magnecrxjstallic  action — copper — tin.  107 

in  the  same  direction.  But  if  a  crystal  was  placed  and  kept  in 
another  position  between  the  magnetic  poles  whilst  the  electric 
current  was  on,  and  afterwards  the  current  suspended,  and  then 
the  crystal  set  free,  it  pointed  between  the  poles  of  the  enfeebled 
magnet  in  this  new  direction ;  showing  that  the  magnetism  was 
in  a  different  direction  in  the  body  of  the  crystal  to  that  which 
it  had  before.  If  now  the  magnet  were  reinvigorated  by  the 
electric  current,  the  crystal  instantly  spun  round  and  took  a 
magnetic  state  in  the  first  or  original  direction.  The  crystals 
could  in  fact  become  magnetized  in  any  direction,  but  there  was 
one  direction  in  which  they  could  be  magnetized  with  a  facility 
and  force  greater  than  in  any  other.  From  the  appearances  I 
am  inclined  to  refer  this  to  the  crystalline  condition,  but  it  may 
be  due  to  an  irregular  diffusion  of  iron  in  the  masses  of  titanium. 
The  crystals  were  too  small  for  me  to  make  out  the  point  clearly. 

2537-  Copper. — I  selected  some  good  crystals  of  native  cop- 
per, and,  having  carefully  separated  them  from  the  mass,  ex- 
amined them  in  respect  of  their  magnecrystallic  force.  At  the 
horse-shoe  magnet  (2486.)  they  gave  no  signs  of  such  power, 
whatever  the  direction  in  which  they  were  suspended,  but  stood 
in  any  position;  and  any  degree  of  torsion,  however  small,  ap- 
plied at  the  upper  extremity  of  the  suspending  filament,  was 
obeyed  at  once,  and  to  the  full  extent,  by  the  crystal  beneath. 
When  subjected  to  the  electro-magnet,  the  phEenomena  of  arrest 
and  revulsion  were  produced  (2513.  2310.),  as  was  to  be  ex- 
pected. If  after  the  arrest  the  magnetic  force  were  continued, 
there  was  no  slow  advance  of  the  crystal  up  to  a  distinct  point- 
ing position  (2512.) ;  it  stood  perfectly  still  in  any  position.  So 
there  is  no  evidence  of  magnecrystallic  action  in  this  case. 

2538.  Tin. — I  selected  from  block  and  grain  tin  some  pieces 
which  appeared,  by  their  external  forms  and  the  surface  pro- 
duced under  the  action  of  acids,  to  have  a  regular  crystalline 
structure  internally ;  and,  cutting  off  portions,  carefully  sub- 
mitted them  to  the  power  of  the  magnets,  but  there  was  no  ap- 
pearance of  any  magnecrystallic  phaenomena.  Indications  of  the 
arresting  and  revulsive  actions  were  presented,  and  also  of  dia- 
magnetic  force,  but  nothing  else.  I  also  examined  some  crystals 
of  tin  obtained  by  electro-chemical  deposition.  They  were  pure 
and  diamagnetic:  they  were  arrested  and  revulsed,  but  they 
showed  no  signs  of  magnecrystallic  action. 


108  Magnecrystallic  action.       [Series  XXIL 

2539.  Lead. — Lead  was  crystallized  by  fusion,  partial  solidifi- 
cation, and  pouring  off'  (2457.)?  and  some  very  fair  crystals, 
having  the  general  form  of  octohedra,  were  obtained.  Observed 
at  the  magnetsj  these  were  arrested  and  revulsed  feebly,  but  pre- 
sented no  magnecrystallic  phaenomena.  Some  fine  crystalline 
plates  of  lead  obtained  electro-chemically  from  the  decomposi- 
tion of  the  acetate  by  zinc,  were  submitted  to  the  magnet :  they 
were  pure,  diamagnetic,  and  were  arrested  and  revulsed,  but 
presented  no  appearance  of  magnecrystallic  action. 

2540.  Gold. — Three  fine  large  crystals  of  gold  were  examined. 
They  were  diamagnetic,  and  easily  arrested  (2310.  2340.);  the 
revulsion  did  not  take  place,  because  of  their  octohedral  or  orbi- 
cular form.    They  presented  no  magnecrystallic  indications. 

2541.  Tellurium. — Two  fractured  pieces  of  this  substance, 
presenting  large  and  parallel  planes  of  cleavage,  were  examined : 
both*  pointed,  and  the  greatest  length  was  across  the  axial  line 
between  flat- faced  poles  (2463.).  I  think  the  effects  were  in  part, 
if  not  altogether,  due  to  the  magnecrystallic  state  of  the  substance ; 
but  I  do  not  think  the  evidence  was  quite  conclusive. 

2542.  Iridium  and  Osmium  alloy. — The  native  grains  of  iri- 
dium and  osmium  are  often  flat,  presenting  two  planes  looking 
like  crystal  planes,  which  are  parallel  to  each  other  even  when 
the  grains  are  thick.  Some  of  the  largest  and  most  crystalline 
were  selected,  and,  after  ignition  with  flux  and  digestion  in 
nitromuriatic  acid,  were  examined  at  the  magnet.  Some  were 
more  magnetic  than  others,  being  attracted ;  others  were  very 
little  magnetic :  the  latter  were  selected  and  examined  more  care- 
fully. These  all  pointed  with  great  readiness  and  force,  com- 
paratively speaking;  for  they  were  not  above  one-fifteenth  of  an 
inch  long,  and  yet  they  set  freely  when  the  magnetic  poles  were 
3  or  4  inches  apart.  The  faces  of  the  crystalline  particles 
were  ahvays  towards  the  poles,  and  their  length  consequently 
not  in  but  across  the  axial  line ;  and  this  was  true  whether  the 
distance  between  the  poles  was  small  or  great,  or  whether  flat- 
faced  or  conical  poles  were  used.  I  believe  they  were  magne- 
crystallic. 

2543.  Fusible  metal.  —  Crystals  of  fusible  metal  (2457  ) 
pointed,  but  the  crystals,  which  were  apparently  quadrangular 
plates  or  prisms,  were  not  good,  and  the  evidence  not  clear  and 
distinct. 


Oct.  1848.]        Wires,  &^c.  — Sulphate  of  iron. 


109 


2544.  Wires. — I  thought  it  possible  that  thin  wires,  which  by 
the  action  of  acids  exhibited  fibrous  arrangements,  might  have 
their  particles  in  a  state  approaching  to  the  crystalline  condition, 
and  therefore  submitted  bundles  of  platinum,  copper,  and  tin 
wire  to  the  action  of  the  magnet ;  but  no  indications  of  magne- 
crystallic  action  appeared. 

2545.  I  submitted  several  metallic  compounds  to  the  power  of 
the  magnet,  applied  so  as  to  develope  any  indication  of  the 
magnecrystallic  phaenomena.  Galena,  native  cinnabar,  oxide  of 
tin,  sulphuret  of  tin,  native  red  oxide  of  copper,  Brookite  or 
oxide  of  titanium,  iron  pyrites,  and  also  diamond,  fluor  spar, 
rock-salt  and  boracite,  being  all  well  crystallized  and  diamagnetic, 
presented  no  evidence  of  the  magnecrystallic  force.  Native  and 
well-crystallized  sulphuret  of  copper,  sulphuret  of  zinc,  cobalt 
glance  and  leucites  were  magnetic.  Arsenical  ii-on,  specular  iron 
and  magnetic  oxide  of  iron  were  still  more  so,  I  could  not  in 
any  of  them  distinguish  any  magnetic  results  due  to  crystalli- 
zation. 

2546.  On  examining  magnetic  salts,  several  of  them  presented 
very  striking  magnecrystallic  phaenomena.  Thus,  with  sulphate 
of  iron,  the  first  crystal  which  I  employed  was  suspended  with 
the  magnecrystallic  axis  vertical,  and  it  presented  no  particular 
appearances;  only  the  longest  horizontal  direction  went  into 
the  magnetic  axis  pointing  feebly.  But  on  turning  the  piece 
90°  (2470.),  instantly  it  pointed  with  much  force,  and  the  greatest 
length  went  equatorially.  The  crystal  was  compounded  of 
superposed  flat  crystals  or  plates,  and  the  magnecrystallic  axis 
went  directly  across  these ;  it  was  easy  therefore,  after  one  or 
two  experiments,  to  tell  beforehand  how  the  crystal  should  be 
suspended,  and  how  it  would  point.  Whether  the  crystals  were 
long,  or  oblique,  or  irregular,  still  the  magnecrystallic  force  pre- 
dominated and  determined  the  position  of  the  crystal,  and  this 
happened  whether  pointed  or  flat  poles  were  used,  and  whether 
they  were  near  together  or  far  asunder.  The  magnecrystallic 
axis  is  perpendicular,  or  nearly  so,  to  two  of  the  sides  of  the 
rhomboidal  prism.  I  have  some  small  prismatic  crystals  of 
which  the  length  is  nearly  three  times  the  width  of  the  prism ; 
but  when  both  the  length  and  the  magnecrystallic  axis  are 
horizontal,  no  power  of  the  magnet,  or  shape,  or  position  of  the 
poles,  will  cause  the  length  to  take  the  axial  direction,  for  that  is 


110 


Magnecrystallic  action.       [Sebies  XXII. 


constantly  retained  by  the  magnecrystallic  axis,  so  greatly  does 
it  predominate  in  power  over  the  mere  magnetic  force  of  the 
crystal.  Yet  this  latter  is  so  great  as  at  times  to  pull  the  suspend- 
ing fibre  asunder  when  the  crystal  is  above  the  poles  (2615.). 

2547.  Sulphate  of  nickel. — When  a  crystal  of  sulphate  of 
nickel  was  suspended  in  the  magnetic  field,  its  length  set 
axially.  This  might  be  due,  either  to  mere  magnetic  force,  or 
partly  to  magnecrystallic  force.  Therefore  I  cut  a  cube  out  of 
the  crystal,  two  faces  of  which  were  perpendicular  to  the  length 
of  the  original  prism.  This  cube  pointed  well  in  the  magnetic 
field,  and  the  line  coincident  with  the  axis  of  the  prism  was  that 
■which  pointed  axially,  and  represented  the  magnecrystallic  axis. 
Even  when  the  cube  was  reduced  in  this  direction  and  con- 
verted into  a  square  plate  whose  thickness  coincided  with  the 
magnecrystallic  axis,  it  pointed  as  well  as  before,  though  the 
shortest  dimensions  of  the  piece  were  now  axial. 

2548.  The  persulphate  of  ammonia  and  iron,  and  the  sulphate 
of  manganese,  did  not  give  any  indication  of  magnecrystallic 
phaenomena ;  the  sulphate  of  ammonia  and  manganese  I  think 
did,  but  the  crystals  were  not  good.  The  sulphate  of  potassa 
and  nickel  is  magnecrystallic.    All  three  salts  were  magnetic. 

2549.  Thus  it  seems  that  other  bodies  besides  bismuth,  anti- 
mony and  arsenic,  present  magnecrystallic  efi'ects.  Amongst 
these  are  the  alloy  of  iridium  and  osmium,  probably  tellurium 
and  titanium,  and  certainly  the  sulphates  of  iron  and  nickel. 
Before  leaving  this  part  of  the  subject,  I  may  remark  that  this 
property  has  probably  led  me  into  error  at  times  on  a  former 
occasion  (2290.).  A  mistake  with  arsenic  (2383.)  might  very 
easily  arise  from  this  cause. 

^  v.  On  the  nature  of  the  magnecrystallic  force,  and  general 

observations  ^ 

2550.  The  magnecrystallic  force  appears  to  be  very  clearly 
distinguished  from  either  the  magnetic  or  diamagnetic  forces,  in 
that  it  causes  neither  approach  nor  recession  ;  consisting  not  in 
attraction  or  repulsion,  but  in  its  giving  a  certain  determinate 
position  to  the  mass  under  its  influence,  so  that  a  given  line  in 
relation  to  the  mass  is  brought  by  it  into  a  given  relation  with 
the  direction  of  the  external  magnetic  power. 

'  See  onwards,  2836,  &c. 


Oct.  1848.]     Nature  of  the  magnecrystallic  force.  Ill 

2551.  I  thought  it  right  very  carefully  to  examine  and  ijrove 
the  conclusion,  that  there  was  no  connexion  of  the  force  with 
either  attractive  or  repulsive  influences.  For  this  purpose  I 
constructed  a  torsion-balance,  with  a  bifilar  suspension  of 
cocoon  silk,  consisting  of  two  bundles  of  seven  filaments  each, 
4  inches  long  and  one-twelfth  of  an  inch  apart;  and  sus- 
pended a  crystal  of  bismuth  (2457.)  from  one  end  of  the  lever, 
so  that  it  might  be  fixed  and  retained  in  any  position.  This 
balance  was  protected  by  a  glass  case,  outside  of  which  the 
conical  terminal  of  one  pole  of  the  great  electro-magnet  (2247-) 
was  adjusted,  so  as  to.  be  horizontal,  at  right  angles  to  the 
lever  of  the  torsion-balance,  and  in  such  a  position  that  the 
bismuth  crystal  was  in  the  prolongation  of  the  axis  of  the  pole, 
and  about  half  an  inch  from  its  extremity  when  all  was  at  rest. 
The  other  pole,  4  inches  off",  was  left  large  so  that  the  lines 
of  magnetic  force  should  diverge,  as  it  were,  and  rapidly  dimi- 
nish in  strength  from  the  end  of  the  conical  pole.  The  object 
was  to  observe  the  degree  of  repulsion  exerted  by  the  magnet  on 
the  bismuth,  as  a  diamagnetic  body,  either  by  the  distance  to 
which  it  was  repelled,  or  by  the  torsion  required  to  bring  it 
back  to  its  first  position ;  and  to  do  this  with  the  bismuth, 
having  its  magnecrystallic  axis  at  one  time  axial  or  parallel 
to  the  lines  of  magnetic  force,  at  another  equatorial,  observing 
whether  any  difference  was  produced. 

2552.  The  crystal  was  therefore  placed  with  its  magnecry- 
stallic axis  first  parallel  to  the  fines  of  magnetic  force,  and  then 
turned  four  times  in  succession  90°  in  a  horizontal  plane,  so  as 
to  observe  it  under  all  positions  of  the  magnecrystaUic  axis ;  but 
in  no  case  could  any  difference  in  the  amount  of  the  repulsion 
be  observed.  In  other  experiments  the  axis  was  placed  oblique, 
but  still  with  the  same  result.  If  there  be  therefore  any  differ- 
ence it  must  be  exceedingly  small 

2553.  A  corresponding  experiment  was  made,  hanging  the 
crystal  as  a  pendulum  by  a  bifilar  suspension  of  cocoon,  silk 
30  feet  in  length,  with  the  same  result. 

2554.  Another  very  striking  series  of  proofs  that  the  effect  is 
not  due  to  attraction  or  repulsion,  was  obtained  in  the  following 
manner.  A  skein  of  fifteen  filaments  of  cocoon  silk,  about  14 
inches  long,  was  made  fast  above,  and  then  a  weight  of  an 


'  See  now  2839,  &c. 


112 


Maffnecri/siallic  action.       [Series  XXII. 


ounce  or  more  hung  to  the  lower  end  ;  the  middle  of  this  skein 
was  about  the  middle  of  the  magnetic  field  of  the  electro-magnet, 
and  the  square  weight  below  rested  against  the  side  of  a  block 
of  wood,  so  as  to  give  a  steady,  silken  vertical  axis,  without 
swing  or  revolution.  A  small  strip  of  card,  about  half  an  inch 
long,  and  the  tenth  of  an  inch  broad,  was  fastened  across  the 
middle  of  this  axis  by  cement  ;  and  then  a  small  prismatic 
crystal  of  sulphate  of  iron  about  0*3  of  an  inch  long,  and  0*1  in 
thickness,  was  attached  to  the  card,  so  that  the  length,  and  also 
the  magnecrystallic  axis,  were  in  the  horizontal  plane ;  all  the 
length  was  on  one  side  of  the  silken  axis,  so  that  as  the  crystal 
swung  round,  the  length  was  radius  to  the  circle  described,  and 
the  magnecrystallic  axis  parallel  to  the  tangent. 

2555.  This  crystal  took  a  position  of  rest  due  to  the  torsion 
force  of  the  suspending  skein  of  silk;  and  the  position  could  be 
made  any  one  that  was  desired,  by  turning  the  weight  below. 
The  torsion  force  was  such,  that,  when  the  crystal  was  made  to 
vibrate  on  its  silken  axis,  forty  complete  (or  to  and  fro)  vibrations 
were  performed  in  a  minute. 

2556.  When  the  crystal  was  made  to  Fig.  4. 
stand  between  the  flat-faced  poles  (2463.) 
obliquely,  as  in  fig.  4,  the  moment  the  mag- 
net was  excited  it  moved,  tending  to  stand  ' ///  <^ 
with  its  length  equatorial  or  its  magnecry- 
stallic axis  parallel  to  the  lines  of  magnetic 
force.  When  the  N  pole  was  removed,  and  the  experiment  re- 
peated, the  same  effect  took  place,  but  not  as  strongly  as  before  ; 
and  when,  finally,  the  pole  S  was  brought  as  near  to  the  crystal 
as  it  could  be,  without  touching  it,  the  same  result  occurred,  and 
with  more  strength  than  in  the  last  case. 

2557.  In  the  two  latter  experiments,  therefore,  the  crystal  of 
sulphate  of  iron,  though  a  magnetic  body  and  strongly  attracted 
by  such  a  magnet  as  that  used,  actually  receded  from  the  pole 
of  the  magnet  under  the  influence  of  the  magnecrystallic  con- 
dition. 

2558.  If  the  pole  S  be  removed  and  that  marked  N  be  retained 
for  action  on  the  crystal,  then  the  latter  approaches  the  pole, 
urged  by  both  the  magnetic  and  magnecrystallic  forces ;  but  if 
the  crystal  be  revolved  90°  to  the  left,  or  180°  to  the  right,  round 
the  silken  axis,  so  as  to  come  into  the  contrary  or  opposite  posi- 
tion, then  this  pole  repels  or  rather  causes  the  removal  to  a 


Oct.  184S.]    Magnecy'ijstallic  force — pecuUmiiies. 


1]3 


distance  of  the  crystal,  just  as  the  former  did.  The  experiment 
requires  care,  and  I  find  that  conical  poles  are  not  good ;  but 
with  attention  I  could  obtain  the  results  with  the  utmost  readiness. 

2559.  The  sulphate  of  iron  was  then  replaced  by  a  crystalline 
plate  (2480.)  of  bismuth,  placed  as  before  on  one  side  of  the  sillc 
suspender,  and  with  its  magnecrystallic  axis  horizontal.  Making 
the  position  the  same  as  that  which  the  crystal  had  in  relation 
to  the  N  pole  in  the  former  experiment  (2556.),  so  that  to  place 
its  axis  parallel  to  the  lines  of  magnetic  force  it  must  approach 
this  magnetic  pole,  and  then  throwing  the  magnet  into  an  active 
state,  the  bismuth  moved  accordingly,  and  did  approach  the 
pole,  against  its  diamagnetic  tendency,  but  under  the  influence 
of  the  magnecrystalUc  force.  The  effect  was  small  but  distinct. 

2560.  Anticipating,  for  a  short  time,  the  result  of  the  reasoning 
to  be  given  further  on  (2607.),  I  will  describe  a  corresponding 
effect  obtained  with  the  red  ferro-prussiate  of  potassa.  A  crystal 
of  this  salt  had  its  acute  linear  angles  ground  away,  so  as  to 
convert  it  into  a  plate  with  faces  parallel  to  the  plane  of  the  optic 
axis,  and  was  then  made  to  replace  the  plate  of  bismuth.  Being 
in  the  position  before  represented  (2556.),  and  the  magnet  ren- 
dered active,  it  moved,  placing  the  plane  of  the  optic  axes  equa- 
torially,  as  Pliicker  describes.  When  the  pole  N  was  removed 
and  S  brought  up  to  the  crystal,  the  same  motion  occurred,  the 
crystal  retreating  from  the  pole  ;  and  when  S  pole  was  removed 
and  N  brought  towards  the  crystal,  it  moved  as  before,  the 
whole  body  now  approaching  towards  the  pole.  On  inclining 
the  crystal  the  other  way,  i.  e.  making  its  place  on  the  other  side 
of  the  equatorial  line,  the  S  pole  caused  it  to  approach  and  the 
N  pole  to  recede.  So  that  the  same  pole  seemed  able  either  to 
attract  or  repel  the  same  side  of  the  crystal;  and  either  pole 
could  be  made  to  show  this  apparent  attractive  and  repulsive 
force. 

2561.  Hence  a  proof  that  neither  attraction  nor  repulsion 
causes  the  set,  or  governs  the  final  position  of  the  body,  or  of 
any  of  the  bodies  whose  movements  are  due  to  the  same  cause 
(2607.). 

2562.  This  force  then  is  distinct  in  its  character  and  effects 
from  the  magnetic  and  diamagnetic  forms  of  force.  On  the 
other  hand,  it  has  a  most  manifest  relation  to  the  crystalline 
structure  of  the  bismuth  and  other  bodies  ;  and  therefore  to  the 

VOL.  III.  1 


114 


Mapiecrystallic  force;       [Series  XXII. 


molecules,  and  to  the  power  by  which  these  molecules  are  able  to 
build  up  the  crystalline  masses.  It  appears  to  me  impossible  to 
conceive  of  the  results  in  any  other  way  than  by  a  mutual  re- 
action of  the  magnetic  force,  and  the  force  of  the  particles  of  the 
crystal  on  each  other :  and  this  leads  the  mind  to  another  con- 
clusion, namely,  that  as  far  as  they  can  act  on  each  other  they 
partake  of  a  like  nature ;  and  brings,  I  think,  fresh  help  for  the 
solution  of  that  great  problem  in  the  philosophy  of  molecular 
forces,  which  assumes  that  they  all  have  one  common  origin 
(2146.). 

2563.  Whether  we  consider  a  crystal  or  a  particle  of  bismuth, 
its  polarity  has  a  very  extraordinary  character,  as  compared 
with  the  polarity  of  a  particle  in  the  ordinary  magnetic  state,  or 
when  compared  with  any  other  of  the  dual  conditions  of  phy- 
sical force ;  for  the  opposite  poles  have  like  characters ;  as  is 
shown  first  of  all  by  the  diametral  pointing  of  the  masses 
(2461.),  and  also  by  the  physical  characters  and  relations  of 
crystals  generally.  As  the  molecules  lie  in  the  mass  of  a  cry- 
stal, therefore,  they  can  in  no  way  represent,  or  be  represented 
by,  the  condition  of  a  parcel  of  iron  filings  between  the  poles  of 
a  magnet,  or  the  particles  of  iron  in  the  keeper  when  in  its 
place ;  for  these  have  poles  of  different  names  and  quality  ad- 
hering together,  and  so  giving  a  sort  of  structure ;  whereas,  in 
the  crystal,  the  molecules  have  poles  of  like  nature  towards  each 
other,  for,  so  to  say,  all  the  poles  are  alike. 

2564.  As  made  manifest  by  the  phaenomena,  the  magnecry- 
stallic  force  is  a  force  acting  at  a  distance ;  for  the  crystal  is 
moved  by  the  magnet  at  a  distance  (2556.  2574.),  and  the 
crystal  also  can  move  the  magnet  at  a  distance.  To  produce 
the  latter  result,  I  converted  a  steel  bodkin,  about  3  inches 
lon^  into  a  magnet ;  and  then  suspended  it  perpendicularly  by 
a  single  cocoon  filament  4  inches  long,  from  a  small  horizon- 
tal rod,  which  again  was  suspended  by  its  centre  and  another 
length  of  cocoon  filament,  from  a  fixed  point  of  support.  In 
this  manner  the  bodkin  was  free  to  move  on  its  own  axis,  and 
could  also  describe  a  circle  about  \^  inch  in  diameter;  and  the 
latter  motion  was  not  hindered  by  any  tendency  of  the  needle  to 
point  under  the  earth's  influence,  because  it  could  take  any 
position  in  the  circle  and  yet  remain  parallel  to  itself. 

2565.  A  support  perfectly  free  from  magnetic  action  was  con- 


Oct.  18  IS.]        Us  nature  and  peculiarities.  115 

structed  of  glass  rod  and  copper  wire,  which  passing  through 
the  bottom  of  the  stand,  and  being  in  the  prolongation  of  the 
upper  axis  of  motion,  was  concentric  with  the  circle  which  the 
little  magnet  could  describe ;  its  height  was  such  that  it  could 
sustain  a  crystal  or  any  other  substance  level  with  the  pole  at 
the  lower  end  of  the  needle,  and  in  the  centre  of  the  small  circle 
in  which  the  latter  could  revolve  around  it.  By  moving  the 
lower  end  of  the  support,  the  upper  end  also  could  be  made  to 
approach  to  or  recede  from  the  magnet.  The  whole  was 
covered  with  a  glass  shade,  and  when  left  to  become  of  uniform 
temperature,  and  at  rest,  the  needle  magnet  was  found  to  take 
up  a  constant  position  under  the  torsion  force  of  the  suspendmg 
filaments.  Further,  any  rotation  of  the  glass  and  copper  wire 
support  did  not  produce  a  final  change  in  the  position  of  the 
magnet;  for  though  the  motion  of  the  air  would  carry  the 
magnet  away,  it  returned,  ultimately,  to  the  same  spot.  When 
removed  from  this  spot,  the  torsion  force  of  the  silk  suspension 
made  the  system  oscillate  ;  the  time  of  a  half  oscillation,  or  a 
passage  in  one  direction,  was  about  three  minutes,  and  of  a 
whole  oscillation  therefore  six  minutes. 

2566.  When  a  crystal  bismuth  was  fixed  on  the  support  with 
the  magnecrystallic  axis  in  a  horizontal  direction,  it  could  be 
placed  near  the  lower  pole  of  the  magnet  in  any  position,  and 
being  then  left  for  two  or  three  hours,  or  until  by  repeated  ex- 
amination the  magnetic  pole  was  found  to  be  stationary,  the 
place  of  the  latter  could  be  examined  and  the  degree  and 
direction  in  which  it  was  affected  by  the  bismuth  ascertained. 
Extreme  precaution  was  required  in  these  observations,  and  all 
steel  or  iron  things,  as  Spectacles,  knives,  keys,  &c.,  had  to  be  dis- 
missed from  the  observer  before  he  entered  the  place  of  experi- 
ment ;  and  glass  candlesticks  were  used.  The  effect  produced  M'as 
but  small,  but  the  result  was,  that  if  the  direction  of  the  magne- 
crystallic axis  made  an  angle  of  10°,  20°,  or  30°  with  the 
line  from  the  magnetic  pole  to  the  middle  of  the  bismuth 
crystal,  then  the  pole  followed  it,  tending  to  bring  the  two  lines 
into  parallelism ;  and  this  it  did  whichever  end  of  the  magne- 
crystallic axis  was  towards  the  pole,  or  whichever  side  it  was  in- 
clined to.  By  moving  the  bismuth  at  successive  times,  the 
deviation  of  the  magnetic  pole  could  be  carried  up  to  60°. 


116 


Magnecrystallic  force;        [Series  XXII. 


2567.  The  crystal  of  bismuth  therefore  is  able  to  react  upon 
and  affect  the  magnet  at  a  distance. 

2568.  But  though  it  thus  take  up  the  character  of  a  force 
acting  at  a  distance,  still  it  is  due  to  that  power  of  the  particles 
which  makes  them  cohere  in  regular  order,  and  gives  the  mass 
its  crystalline  aggregation ;  which  we  call  at  other  times  the 
attraction  of  aggregation,  and  so  often  speak  of  as  acting  at 
insensible  distances. 

2569.  For  the  further  explication  of  the  nature  of  this  force, 
I  proceeded  to  examine  the  effect  of  heat  on  crystals  of  bismuth 
when  in  the  magnetic  field.  The  crystals  were  suspended 
either  by  platina  or  fine  copper  wire,  and  heated,  sometimes  by 
a  small  spirit-lamp  flame  applied  directly,  sometimes  in  an  oil- 
bath  placed  between  the  magnetic  poles;  and  though  the  up- 
ward currents  of  air  and  fluid  were  strong  in  these  cases,  they 
were  far  too  weak  to  overcome  the  set  caused  by  magnecrystallic 
action,  and  helped  rather  to  show  when  that  action  was  weakened 
or  ceased. 

2570.  When  the  temperature  was  gradually  raised  in  the  air 
the  bismuth  crystal  continued  to  point,  until  of  a  sudden  it  be- 
came indifferent  in  that  respect,  and  turned  in  any  direction 
under  the  influence  of  the  rising  currents  of  air.  Instantly 
removing  the  lamp  flame  the  bismuth  revolved  slowly  and  regu- 
larly, as  if  there  were  no  tendency  to  take  up  one  position  more 
than  another,  or  no  remains  of  magnecrystallic  action  ;  but  in  a 
few  seconds,  as  the  temperature  fell,  it  resumed  its  power  of 
pointing;  and,  apparently,  in  an  instant  and  with  full  force,  and 
the  pointing  was  precisely  in  the  same  direction  as  at  first.  On 
examining  the  crystal  carefully,  its  external  shape  and  its 
cleavage  showed  that,  as  a  crystal,  it  was  unchanged ;  but  the 
appearance  of  a  minute  globule  of  bismuth,  which  had  exuded 
upon  the  surface  in  one  place,  showed  that  the  temperature  had 
been  close  upon  the  point  of  fusion. 

2571.  The  same  result  occurred  in  the  oil-bath,  except  that 
as  removing  the  lamp  from  the  oil-bath  did  not  immediately 
stop  the  addition  of  heat  to  the  bismuth,  so  more  of  the  latter 
was  melted ;  and  about  one-fourth  of  the  metal  appeared  as 
a  drop  hanging  at  the  lower  part.  Still  the  whole  mass  lost  its 
power  at  the  high  temperature,  and  the  power  was  regained  in 


Oct.  1848.] 


effect  of  heat — position. 


117 


the  same  direction,  but  in  a  less  degree  on  cooling.  The  dimi- 
nished force  was  accounted  for  on  breaking  up  the  crystal ; 
for  the  parts  which  had  been  liquefied  were  now  crystallized 
irregularly,  and  therefore,  though  active  at  the  beginning  of  the 
experiment,  were  neutral  at  the  end. 

2572.  As  heat  has  this  effect,  the  expectation  entertained 
(2502.)  of  crystallizing  bismuth  regularly  in  the  magnetic  field 
is  of  course  unfounded ;  for  the  metal  must  acquire  the  solid 
state,  and  be  lowered  through  several  degrees  probably,  before 
it  can  exhibit  the  magnecrystallic  phaenomena.  If  heat  has  the 
same  effect  on  all  bodies  prior  to  their  liquefaction,  then,  of 
course,  such  a  process  can  be  applied  to  none  of  them. 

2573.  A  crystallized  piece  of  antimony  was  subjected  to  the 
same  experiment,  and  it  also  lost  its  magnecrystallic  power 
below  a  dull  red  heat,  and  just  as  it  was  softening  so  as  to  take 
the  impression  of  the  copper  loop  in  which  it  was  hung.  On 
being  cooled  it  did  not  resume  its  former  state,  but  then  became 
ordinarily  magnetic  and  pointed.  This  I  conclude  arose  from 
iron  affected  by  the  flame  and  heat  of  the  spirit-lamp ;  for,  as 
the  heat  was  high  enough  to  burn  off  part  of  the  antimony  and 
make  it  rise  in  fumes  of  oxide  of  antimony,  so  this  might  set  a 
certain  portion  of  iron  free  which  the  carbon  and  hydrogen  of 
the  flame  would  leave  in  a  very  magnetic  state  (2608.). 

2574.  In  further  elucidation  of  the  mutual  action  of  the  bis- 
muth and  the  magnet,  the  bismuth  was  suspended,  as  already 
described  (2551.),  on  the  bifilar  balance,  but  so  turned,  that  its 
magnecrystallic  axis,  being  horizontal,  was  not  parallel  or  per- 
pendicular to  the  arm  of  the  lever,  but 

a  little  inclined,  as  in  the  figure  (5.),  ^'^*  ^* 

where  1   represents  the  crystal  of 

bismuth  attached  to  thebalance  arm  6,       _  \  ^ 

the  axis  of  which  is  so  placed  that  the  ^-^"'^^^ 
crystal  can  swing  through  the  various  ^  J^^^ 

positions  1,  2,  3,  4  ;  S  is  the  pole  of  '-q^ 
the  magnet  separated  only  by  the  glass 
of  the  shade.    It  is  manifest,  that  in 

position  1  the  magnecrystallic  axes  and  the  lines  of  magnetic 
force  are  parallel  to  each  other ;  whereas  in  the  positions  2,  3,  4, 
they  are  oblique.  When  the  apparatus  was  so  arranged  that 
the  crystal  of  bismuth  rested  at  1,  the  superinduction  of  the  full 


118 


Magnecrystallic  force;      [Series  XXII. 


magnetic  force  sent  it  towards  4  ;  a  result  of  diamagnetic  action. 
When  however  the  bismuth  had  its  place  of  rest  at  2,  the 
development  of  the  magnetic  force  did  not  make  it  pass  to- 
wards 3,  in  accordance  with  the  former  result,  but  towards  1, 
which  it  usually  attained  and  often  passed,  going  a  little  towards 
4-.  In  this  case  the  magnecrystallic  and  the  diamagnetic  forces 
were  opposed  to  each  other,  and  the  former  gained  the  advan- 
tage up  to  position  1 . 

2575.  But  though  the  crystal  of  bismuth  in  these  cases  moves 
across  the  lines  of  force  in  the  magnetic  field,  it  cannot  be  ex- 
pected to  do  so  in  a  field  where  the  lines  are  parallel  and  of 
equal  force,  as  between  flat-faced  poles ;  the  crystal  being  re- 
strained so  as  to  move  only  parallel  to  itself ;  for  under  such 
circumstances  the  forces  are  equal  in  both  directions  and  on 
both  sides  of  the  mass,  and  the  only  tendency  the  crystal  has, 
in  relation  to  its  magnecrystallic  condition,  is  to  turn  round  a 
vertical  axis  until  it  is  in  its  natural  position  in  the  magnetic 
field. 


2576.  A  most  important  question  next  arises  in  relation  to 
the  magnecrystallic  force,  namely,  whether  it  is  an  original  force 
inherent  in  the  crystal  of  bismuth,  &c.,  or  whether  it  is  induced 
under  the  magnetic  and  electric  influences.  When  a  piece  of 
soft  iron  is  held  in  the  vicinity  of  a  magnet  it  acquires  new 
powers  and  properties ;  some  persons  assume  this  to  depend 
upon  the  development  by  induction  of  a  new  force  in  the  iron 
and  its  particles,  like  in  nature  to  that  in  the  inducing  magnet : 
by  others  it  is  considered  that  the  force  originally  existed  in  the 
particles  of  the  iron,  and  that  the  inductive  action  consisted  only 
in  the  arrangement  of  all  the  elementary  forces  in  one  general 
direction.  Applying  this  to  the  crystal  of  bismuth,  we  cannot 
make  use  of  the  latter  supposition  in  the  same  manner ;  for  all 
the  particles  are  arranged  beforehand,  and  it  is  that  very 
arrangement  of  them  and  their  forces  which  gives  the  bismuth 
its  power.  If  the  particles  of  a  substance  be  in  the  heteroge- 
neous condition  possessed  by  those  of  the  iron  in  its  unmagnetic 
state,  then  the  magnetic  force  may  develope  the  magnetic,  and 
also  the  diamagnetic  condition,  which  probably  is  a  condition  of 
induction ;  but  it  does  not  appear  at  once,  that  it  can  develope 
a  state  of  the  kind  now  under  consideration. 


Oct.  1848.]  condition  of  the  particles. 


119 


2577.  That  the  particles  hold  their  own  to  a  great  extent  in 
all  the  results  is  manifest,  by  the  consideration  that  they  have 
an  inherent  power  or  force,  the  crystalline  force,  which  is  so 
unchangeable  that  no  treatment  to  which  they  can  be  subjected 
can  alter  it ;  that  it  is  this  very  force  which,  placing  the  particles 
in  a  regular  position  in  the  mass,  enables  them  to  act  jointly  on 
the  magnet  or  the  electric  current,  and  affect  or  be  affected  by 
them ;  and  that  if  the  particles  are  not  so  arranged,  but  are  in 
all  directions  in  the  mass,  then  the  sum  of  their  forces  externally 
is  nothing,  and  no  inductive  exertion  of  the  magnet  or  current 
can  develope  the  slightest  trace  of  the  phaenomena. 

2578.  And  that  particles  even  before  crystallization  can  act  in 
some  degree  at  a  distance,  by  virtue  of  their  crystallizing  force, 
is,  I  think,  shown  by  the  following  fact.  A  jar  containing 
about  a  quart  of  solution  of  sulphate  of  soda,  of  such  strength  as 
to  crystallize  when  cold  by  the  touch  of  a  crystal  of  the  salt  or 
an  extraneous  body,  was  left,  accidentally,  for  a  week  or  more 
unattended  to  and  undisturbed.  The  solution  remained  fluid ; 
but  on  the  jar  being  touched,  crystallization  took  place  through-, 
out  the  whole  mass  at  once,  producing  clear,  distinct,  trans- 
parent plates,  which  were  an  inch  or  more  in  length,  up  to 
half  an  inch  in  breadth  ;  and  very  thin,  perhaps  about  the  one- 
fiftieth  or  one-sixtieth  of  an  inch.  These  were  all  horizontal, 
and  of  course  parallel  to  each  other ;  and  I  think,  if  I  remember 
rightly,  had  their  length  in  the  same  direction ;  and  they  were 
alike  in  character,  and,  apparently,  in  quantity  in  every  part  of 
the  jar.  They  almost  held  the  fluid  in  its  place  when  the  jar 
was  tilted ;  and  when  the  liquid  was  poured  off  presented  a 
beautiful  and  uniform  assemblage  of  crystals.  The  result  per- 
suaded me,  at  the  time,  that  though  the  influence  of  a  particle 
in  solution  and  about  to  crystalhze,  must  be  immediately  and 
essentially  upon  its  neighbours,  yet  that  it  could  exert  an  in- 
fluence beyond  these,  without  which  influence,  the  w  hole  mass  of 
solution  could  hardly  have  been  brought  into  such  a  uniform 
crystallizing  state.  Whether  the  horizontality  of  the  plates  can 
have  any  relation  to  the  almost  vertical  lines  of  magnetic  force, 
which  from  the  earth's  magnetism  was  pervading  the  solution 
during  the  whole  time  of  its  rest,  is  more  than  I  will  venture  to 
say. 


120 


Magnecrystallic  force ;       [Series  XXII. 


2579.  The  following  are  considerations  which  bear  upon  this 
great  question  (2576.)  of  an  original  or  an  induced  state. 

2580.  In  the  first  place,  the  bismuth  carries  off  no  poM'er  or 
particular  state  from  the  magnetic  field,  able  to  make  it  affect  a 
magnet  (2504.)  ;  so  that  if  the  condition  acquired  by  the  crystal 
be  an  induced  condition,  it  is  probably  a  transient  one,  and  con- 
tinues only  whilst  under  induction.  The  fact,  therefore,  though 
negative  in  its  evidence,  agrees,  as  far  as  it  tells,  with  that  sup- 
position. 

2581.  In  the  next  place,  if  the  effect  were  wholly  due,  as  far 
as  the  crystal  is  concerned,  to  an  original  power  inherent  in  the 
mass,  we  might  expect  to  find  the  earth's  magnetism,  or  any 
weak  magnet,  affecting  the  crystal.  It  is  true  that  a  weak  mag- 
netic force  ought  to  induce  any  given  condition  in  a  crystal  of 
bismuth  just  as  well  as  a  stronger,  only  proportionally.  But  if 
the  given  condition  were  inherent  in  the  crystal,  and  did  not 
change  in  its  amount  by  the  degree  of  magnetic  force  to  which 
it  was  subjected,  then  a  weak  magnetic  force  ought  to  act  more 
decidedly  on  the  bismuth  than  it  would  do  if  the  condition  were 
induced  in  the  bismuth,  and  only  in  proportion  to  its  own 
force.  Whatever  the  value  of  the  argument,  I  was  induced 
to  repeat  the  experiment  of  the  earth's  influence  (2505.)  very 
carefully,  and  by  sheltering  the  suspended  crystals  in  small 
flasks  or  jars  contained  within  the  larger  covering  jar,  and 
making  the  experiment  in  an  underground  place  of  uniform  and 
constant  temperature,  1  was  able  to  exclude  every  effect  of 
currents  of  air,  so  that  the  crystals  obeyed  the  slightest  degree 
of  torsion  given  to  the  suspending  fibre  by  the  index  above. 
Under  these  circumstances  I  could  obtain  no  indications  of 
pointing  by  the  earth's  action,  either  with  crystals  of  bismuth 
or  of  sulphate  of  iron.  Perhaps  at  the  equator,  where  the  lines 
of  force  are  horizontal,  they  might  be  rendered  sensible. 

2582.  In  the  third  place,  assuming  that  there  is  an  original 
force  in  the  crystals  and  their  molecules,  it  might  be  expected 
that  they  would  show  some  direct  influence  upon  each  other, 
independent  of  the  magnetic  force,  and  if  so  the  best  possible 
argument  would  be  thus  obtained  that  the  force  which  is  ren- 
dered manifest  in  the  magnetic  field  was  inherent  in  them.  But 
on  placing  a  large  crystal  with  its  magnecrystallic  axis  horizontal 


Oct.  184S.] 


induced  or  inherent. 


121 


under  a  smaller  and  suspended  one,  or  side  by  side  M  ith  it,  I 
could  procure  no  signs  of  mutual  action  ;  even  when  the  ap- 
j)roximated  parts  of  the  crystals  were  ground  or  dissolved  away, 
so  as  to  let  the  two  masses  come  as  near  as  possible  to  each 
other,  having  large  surfaces  at  the  smallest  possible  distance. 
Extreme  care  is  required  in  such  experiments  (2581.),  or  else 
many  results  are  produced  which  seem  to  show  a  mutual  affec- 
tion of  the  bodies. 

2583.  Neither  could  I  find  any  trace  of  mutual  action  between 
crystals  of  bismuth,  or  of  sulphate  of  iron,  when  they  were  both 
in  the  magnetic  field,  the  one  being  freely  suspended  and  the 
other  brought  in  vai'ious  positions  near  to  it. 

2584.  From  the  absence  therefore  or  extreme  weakness  of  any 
power  in  the  crystals  to  affect  each  other,  and  also  from  the 
action  of  heat  which  can  take  away  the  power  of  the  crystal 
before  it  has  lost  its  mere  crystalline  condition  (2570.),  I  am 
induced  to  believe  that  the  force  manifested  in  the  crystal  when 
in  the  magnetic  field,  which  appears  by  external  actions,  and 
causes  the  motion  of  the  mass,  is  chiefly  and  almost  entirely 
induced,  in  a  manner,  subject  indeed  to  the  crystalline  force,  and 
finally  additive  to  it ;  but  at  the  same  time  exalting  the  force 
and  the  eflfects  to  a  degree  which  they  could  not  have  approached 
without  the  induction. 

2585.  In  that  case  the  word  magnetocrystallic  ought  pro- 
bably to  be  applied  to  this  force,  as  it  is  generated  or  deve- 
loped under  the  influence  of  the  magnet.  The  word  magnecry- 
stallic  I  used  purposely  to  indicate  that  which  I  believed  be- 
longed to  the  crystal  itself,  and  I  shall  still  speak  of  the  magne- 
crystallic  axis,  &c.  in  that  sense. 

2586.  This  force  appears  to  me  to  be  very  strange  and  striking 
in  its  character.  It  is  not  polar,  for  there  is  no  attraction  or  re- 
pulsion. Then  what  is  the  nature  of  the  mechanical  force  which 
turns  the  crystal  round  (2460.),  or  makes  it  affect  a  magnet 
(2564.)  ?  It  is  not  like  a  turning  helix  of  wire  acted  on  by  the 
lines  of  magnetic  force  ;  for  there,  there  is  a  current  of  electricity 
required,  and  the  ring  has  polarity  all  the  time  and  is  powerfully 
attracted  or  repelled*. 

*  Perhaps  these  points  may  find  their  explication  herrafter  in  the  action  of 
contiguous  particles  (1663.  1710.  1729.  1735.  2443.). 


122 


Magnecrystallic  force ;       [Series  XXII. 


2587-  If  we  suppose  for  a  moment  that  the  axial  position  is 
that  in  which  the  crystal  is  unaffected,  and  that  it  is  in  the 
obUque  position  that  the  magnecrystaUic  axial  direction  is 
affected  and  rendered  polar,  giving  two  tensions  pulling  the 
crystal  round,  then  there  ought  to  be  attractions  at  these  times, 
and  an  obliquely  presented  crystal  ought  to  be  attracted  by  a 
single  pole,  or  the  nearest  of  two  poles ;  but  no  action  of  this 
kind  appears. 

2588.  Or  we  might  suppose  that  the  crystal  is  a  little  more 
apt  for  magnetic  induction,  or  a  little  less  apt  for  diamagnetic 
induction,  in  the  direction  of  the  magnecrystallic  axis  than  in 
other  directions.  But,  if  so,  it  should  surely  show  polar  at- 
tractions in  the  case  of  the  magnetic  bodies,  as  sulphate  of  iron 
(2557.  2583.)  ;  and  in  the  case  of  diamagnetic  bodies,  as  bismuth, 
a  difference  in  the  degree  of  repulsion  when  presented  with  the 
magnecrystallic  axis  parallel  and  perpendicular  to  the  lines  of 
magnetic  force  (2552.) ;  which  it  does  not  do. 

2589.  I  do  not  remember  heretofore  such  a  case  of  force  as 
the  present  one,  where  a  body  is  brought  into  position  only, 
without  attraction  or  repulsion. 

2590.  If  the  power  be  induced,  it  must  be  like,  generally,  to 
its  inducing  predominants ;  and  these  are,  at  present,  the  mag- 
netic and  electric  forces.  If  induced,  subject  to  the  crystal- 
line force  (2577.),  it  must  show  an  intimate  relation  between  it 
and  them.  How  hopeful  we  may  be,  therefore,  that  the  results 
will  help  to  throw  open  the  doors  which  may  lead  us  to  a  full 
knowledge  of  these  powers  (2146.),  and  the  combined  manner  in 
which  they  dwell  in  the  particles  of  matter,  and  exert  their  in- 
fluence in  producing  the  wonderful  phaenomena  which  they 
present ! 

2591.  I  cannot  resist  throwing  forth  another  view  of  these 
phsenomena  which  may  possibly  be  the  true  one.  The  Unes  of 
magnetic  force  may  perhaps  be  assumed  as  in  some  degree  re- 
sembling the  rays  of  light,  heat,  &c. ;  and  may  find  difficulty  in 
passing  through  bodies,  and  so  be  affected  by  them,  as  light  is 
affected.  They  may,  for  instance,  w4ien  a  crystalHne  body  is 
interposed,  pass  more  freely,  or  with  less  disturbance,  through  it 
in  the  direction  of  the  magnecrystallic  axis  than  in  other  direc- 
tions. In  that  case,  the  position  which  the  crystal  takes  in  the 
magnetic  field  with  its  magnecrystallic  axis  parallel  to  the  lines 


Oct.  1848.] 


suppositions  as  to  its  nature. 


123 


of  magnetic  force,  may  be  the  position  of  no,  or  of  least  resist- 
ance ;  and  therefore  the  position  of  rest  and  stable  equilibrium. 
All  the  diametral  effects  would  agree  with  this  view.  Then,  just 
as  the  optic  axis  is  to  a  ray  of  polarized  light,  namely,  the  direc- 
tion in  which  it  is  not  affected,  so  would  the  magnecrystallic 
axis  be  to  the  lines  of  magnetic  force.  If  such  were  the  case, 
then,  also,  as  the  pheenomena  are  developed  in  crystalline  bodies, 
we  might  hope  for  the  discovery  of  a  series  of  effects  dependent 
upon  retardation  and  influence  in  direction,  parallel  to  the  beau- 
tiful phaenomena  presented  by  light  with  similar  bodies.  In 
making  this  supposition,  I  do  not  forget  the  points  of  inertia 
and  momentum ;  but  such  an  idea  as  I  can  form  of  inertia  does 
not  exclude  the  above  view  as  altogether  irrational.  I  remember 
too,  that,  when  a  magnetic  pole  and  a  wire  carrying  an  electric 
current  are  fastened  together,  so  that  one  cannot  turn  without  the 
other,  if  the  one  be  made  axis  the  other  will  revolve  round  and 
carry  the  first  with  it ;  and  also,  that  if  a  magnet  be  floated  in 
mercury  and  a  current  sent  down  it,  the  magnet  will  revolve  by 
the  powers  which  are  within  its  mass.  With  my  imperfect 
mathematical  knowledge,  there  seems  as  much  difficulty  in  these 
motions  as  in  the  one  I  am  supposing,  and  therefore  I  venture  to 
put  forth  the  idea The  hope  of  a  polarized  bundle  of  magnetic 
forces  is  enough  of  itself  to  make  one  work  earnestly  with  such 
an  object,  though  only  in  imagination,  before  us ;  and  I  may  well 
say  that  no  man,  if  he  take  industry,  impartiality  and  caution 
with  him  in  his  investigations  of  science,  ever  works  experi- 
mentally in  vain. 

2592.  I  have  already  referred,  in  the  former  paper  (2469.),  to 
Pliicker's  beautiful  discovery  and  results  in  reference  to  the 
repulsion  of  the  optic  axis^  of  certain  crystals  by  the  magnet,  and 
have  distinguished  them  from  my  own  obtained  with  bismuth, 
antimony  and  arsenic,  which  are  not  cases  of  either  repulsion  or 
attraction ;  believing  then,  with  Pliicker,  that  the  force  there 
manifested  is  an  optic  axis  force,  exerted  in  the  equatorial  direc- 
tion; and  therefore  existing  in  a  direction  at  right  angles  to  that 
which  produces  the  magnecrystallic  phaenomena. 

'  See  note  (2639.). 

'  On  the  Repulsion  of  the  Optic  Axes  of  Crystals  by  the  Poles  of  a  Magnet, 
Poggendorff's  Annalen,  vol.  Ixxii.,  October  i847,  or  Taylor's  Scientific 
Memoirs,  vol.  v.  p.  353. 


124  Mayaecnjstallic  force ;       [Series  XXII. 

2593.  But  the  relations  of  both  to  crystalline  structure,  and 
therefore  to  the  force  which  confers  that  condition,  are  most 
evident.  Other  considerations  as  to  position,  set,  and  turning,  a.lso 
show  that  the  two  forces,  so  to  say,  have  a  very  different  relation 
to  each  other  to  that  which  exists  between  them  and  the  mag- 
netic or  diamagnetic  force.  As,  therefore,  this  strong  hkeness 
on  the  one  hand,  and  distinct  separation  on  the  other  is  clearly 
indicated,  I  will  endeavour  to  compare  the  two  sets  of  effects, 
with  the  view  of  ascertaining  whether  the  force  exerted  in  pro- 
ducing them  is  not  identical. 

2594.  I  had  the  advantage  of  verifying  Pliicker's  results 
under  his  own  personal  tuition  in  respect  of  tourmaline,  stauroUte, 
red  ferro-prussiate  of  potassa,  and  Iceland  spar.  Since  then,  and 
in  reference  to  the  present  inquiry,  I  have  carefully  examined 
calcareous  spar,  as  being  that  one  of  the  bodies  which  was  at  the 
same  time  free  from  magnetic  action,  and  so  simple  in  its  cry- 
stalline relations  as  to  possess  but  one  optic  axis. 

2595.  Whenasmall  rhomboid,  about  0-3  of  an  inch  in  its  greatest 
dimension,  is  suspended,  with  its  optic  axis  horizontal,  between 
the  pointed  poles  (2458.)  of  the  electro- magnet,  approximated 
as  closely  as  they  can  be  to  allow  free  motion,  the  rhomboid  sets 
in  the  equatorial  direction,  and  the  optic  axis  coincides  with  the 
magnetic  axis ;  but,  if  the  poles  be  separated  to  the  distance  of 
half,  or  three-quarters  of  an  inch,  the  rhomboid  turned  through 
90°,  and  set  with  the  optic  axis  in  the  equatorial  direction,  and 
the  greatest  length  axial.  In  the  first  instance  the  diamagnetic 
force  overcame  the  optic  axis  force ;  in  the  second  the  optic  axis 
force  was  the  stronger  of  the  two. 

2596.  To  remove  the  diamagnetic  effect  I  used  flat  poles 
(2463.),  and  then  the  little  rhomboid  always  set  in,  or  vibrated 
about,  that  position  in  which  its  optic  axis  was  equatorial. 

2597.  I  also  took  three  cubes  of  calcareous  spar  (1695.),  in 
which  the  optic  axes  were  perpendicular  to  two  of  the  faces,  of 
the  respective  dimensions  of  0-3,  0-5,  and  0;8  of  an  inch  in  the 
side,  and  placed  these  in  succession  in  the  magnetic  field,  be- 
tween either  flat  or  pointed  poles.  In  all  cases,  the  optic  axis, 
if  horizontal,  passed  into  the  equatorial  position  ;  or,  if  vertical, 
left  the  cubes  indifferent  as  to  direction.  It  was  easy  by  the 
method  of  two  positions  (2470.)  to  find  the  line  of  force,  which, 
being  vertical,  left  the  mass  unadectcd  by  the  magnet ;  or  being 


Oct.  1848.] 


its  nature  considered. 


125 


horizontal,  went  into  the  equatorial  position ;  and  then  exami- 
ning the  cube  by  polarized  light,  it  was  found  that  this  line  coin- 
cided with  the  optic  axis. 

2598.  Even  the  horse  shoe  magnet  (2485.)  is  sufficiently 
strong  to  produce  these  effects. 

2599.  I  tried  two  similar  cubes  of  rock-crystal  (1692.),  but 
could  perceive  no  traces  of  any  pli^enomena  having  either  mag- 
neoptic,  or  magnecrystallic,  or  any  other  relation  to  the  crystal- 
line structure  of  the  masses. 

2600.  But  though  it  is  thus  very  certain  that  there  is  a  line 
in  a  crystal  of  calcareous  spar  coinciding  with  the  optic  axis, 
which  line  seems  to  represent  the  resultant  of  the  forces  which 
make  the  crystal  take  up  a  given  position  in  the  magnetic  field; 
and,  though  it  is  equally  certain  that  this  line  takes  up  its  posi- 
tion in  the  equatorial  direction  ;  yet,  considered  as  a  line  of  force, 
i.  e.  as  representing  the  direction  of  the  force  which  places  the 
crystal  in  that  position,  it  seems  to  me  to  have  something  anoma- 
lous in  its  character.  For,  that  a  directing  and  determining  line 
of  force  shotdd  have,  as  its  full  effect,  the  result  of  going  into  a 
plane  (the  equatorial),  in  which  it  can  take  up  any  one  of  an 
infinite  number  of  positions  indifierently,  leaves  an  imperfect 
idea  on  my  mind ;  and  a  thought,  that  there  is  some  other  effect 
or  residual  phaenomena  to  be  recognized  and  accounted  for. 

2601.  On  further  consideration,  it  appears  that  a  simple  com- 
bination of  the  magnecrystalline  condition,  as  it  exists  in  bis- 
muth, will  supply  us  with  a  perfect  representation  of  the  state 
of  calcareous  spar  ;  for,  by  placing  two  equal  pieces  of  bismuth 
with  their  magnecrystallic  axes  perpendicular  to  each  other 
(2484.),  we  have  a  system  of  forces  which  seems  to  possess,  as 
a  resultant,  a  line  setting  in  the  equatorial  direction.  When 
that  line  is  vertical,  the  system  is,  as  regards  position,  indifferent ; 
but  when  horizontal,  the  system  so  stands,  that  the  line  is  in 
the  equatorial  plane.  Still,  the  real  force  is  not  in  the  equatorial 
direction,  but  axial ;  and  the  system  is  moved  by  what  may  be 
considered  a  plane  of  axial  force  (resulting  from  the  union  of 
the  two  axes  at  right  angles  to  each  other),  rather  than  by  a  line 
of  equatorial  force. 

2602.  Doubtless,  the  rhomboid  or  cube  (2597.)  of  calcareous 
spar  is  not  a  compound  crystal,  like  the  system  of  bismuth 
crystals  just  referred  to  (2601.)  ;  but  its  molecules  may  possess 


126 


Magnecrystallic  force;       [Series  XXII. 


a  compound  disposition  of  their  forces,  and  may  have  two  or 
more  axes  of  power,  which  at  the  same  time  that  they  cause  the 
crystalUne  structure,  may  exert  such  force  in  relation  to  the 
magnet,  as  to  give  results  in  the  same  manner,  and  of  the  same 
kind,  as  those  of  the  double  crystal  of  bismuth  (2601.).  Indeed, 
that  there  should  be  but  one  axis  of  crystalline  force,  either  in 
the  particle  of  Iceland  spar,  or  in  those  of  bismuth,  does  not 
seem  to  me  to  be  any  M'ay  consistent  with  the  cleavage  of  the 
substances  in  three  or  more  directions. 

2603.  The  optic  axis  in  a  piece  of  calcareous  spar,  is  simply 
the  line  in  which,  if  a  polarized,  or  ordinary  ray  of  light  moves, 
it  is  the  least  affected.  It  may  be  a  line  which,  as  a  resultant  of 
the  molecular  forces,  is  that  of  the  least  intensity ;  and,  cer- 
tainly, as  regards  ordinary  and  mechanical  means  of  observing 
cohesion,  a  piece  of  calcareous  spar  is  sensibly,  and  much  hai'der 
on  the  faces  and  parts  which  are  parallel  to  the  optic  axis,  than 
on  those  perpendicular  to  it.  An  ordinary  file  or  a  piece  of 
sandstone  shows  this.  So  that  the  plane  equatorial  to  the  optic 
axis,  as  it  represents  directions  in  which  the  force  causing  cry- 
stallization is  greater  in  degree  than  in  the  direction  of  the  optic 
axis,  may  also  be  that  in  which  the  resultant  of  its  magnecry- 
stallic force  is  exerted. 

2604.  I  am  bound  to  state,  as  in  some  degree  in  contrast  with 
such  considerations,  that,  with  bismuth,  antimony  and  arsenic, 
the  cleavage  is  very  facile  perpendicular  to  the  magnecrystallic 
axis  (2475.  2510.  2532.).  But  we  must  remember  that  the 
cleavage  (and  therefore  the  cohesive)  force  is  not  the  only  thing 
to  be  considered,  for  in  calcareous  spar  it  does  not  coincide  with 
either  the  axial  or  the  equatorial  direction  of  the  substance  in 
the  magnetic  field :  we  must  endeavour  to  look  beyond  this  to 
the  polar  (or  axial)  condition  of  the  particles  of  the  masses,  for 
the  full  understanding  and  true  relation  of  all  these  points. 

2605.  I  am  bound,  also,  to  admit  that,  if  we  consider  calca- 
reous spar  as  giving  the  simple  system  of  force,  we  may,  by  the 
juxtaposition  of  two  crystals  with  their  optic  axes  at  right  angles 
to  each  other,  produce  a  compound  mass,  which  will  truly 
represent  the  bismuth  in  the  direction  of  the  force ;  i.  e.  it  will, 
in  the  magnetic  field,  point  with  apparently  one  line  of  force 
only,  and  that  in  the  axial  direction,  whilst  it  may  be  really 
moved  by  a  system  of  forces  lying  in  the  equatorial  plane.  I 


Oct.  1848.] 


its  nature  considered . 


127 


will  not  at  present  pretend  to  say  that  this  is  not  the  state  of 
things ;  but  I  think,  however,  that  the  metals,  bismuth,  anti- 
mony and  arsenic,  present  us  with  the  simplest  as  they  do  the 
strongest  cases  of  magnecrystallic  force ;  and  whether  that  be 
so  or  not,  I  am  still  of  opinion  that  the  pheenomena  discovered 
by  Pliicker  and  those  of  which  I  have  given  an  account  in 
these  two  papers,  have  one  common  origin  and  cause. 

2606.  I  went  through  all  the  experiments  and  reasonings  with 
Pllicker's  crystals  (as  the  carbonate  of  Hme,  tourmaline  and 
red  ferro-prussiate  of  potassa),  in  reference  to  the  question  of 
original  or  induced  power  (2576.),  as  before,  and  came  to  the 
same  conclusion  as  in  the  former  case  (2584.). 

2607.  I  could  not  find  that  crystals  of  red  ferro-prussiate  of 
potassa  or  tourmaline  were  affected  by  the  earth's  magnetism 
(2581.),  or  that  they  had  the  power  of  affecting  each  other 
(2582.).  Neither  could  I  find  that  Pliicker's  effect  with  cal- 
careous spar,  or  red  ferro-prussiate  of  potassa,  was  either  an 
attractive  or  repulsive  effect,  but  one  connected  with  position 
only  (2550.2560.).  All  which  circumstances  tend  to  convince 
me  that  the  force  active  in  his  experiments,  and  that  in  my  re- 
sults with  bismuth,  &c.,  is  the  same  ^. 

2608.  A  small  rhomboid  of  Iceland  spar  was  raised  to  the 
highest  temperature  in  the  magnetic  field  which  a  spirit-lamp 
could  give  (2570.) ;  it  was  at  least  equal  to  the  full  red  heat  of 
copper,  but  it  pointed  as  well  then  as  before.  A  short  thick 
tourmaline  was  heated  to  the  same  degree,  and  it  also  pointed 
equally  well.  As  it  cooled,  however,  it  became  highly  magnetic, 
and  seemed  to  be  entirely  useless  for  experiments  at  low  tem- 
peratures; but  on  digesting  it  for  a  few  seconds  in  nitromu- 
riatic  acid,  a  little  iron  was  dissolved  from  the  surface,  after  which 
it  pointed  as  well,  and  in  accordance  with  Pliicker's  law,  as 
before.  A  little  peroxide  upon  the  surface  had  been  reduced  by 
the  flame  and  heat  to  protoxide,  and  caused  the  magnetic 
appearances. 

*  The  optic  axis  is  the  direction  of  least  optic  force  ;  and  by  Pliicker's  expe- 
riments, coincides  with  what  I  consider  in  my  results  as  the  direction  of  mini- 
mum magnecrystallic  force.  It  is  more  than  probable  that,  wherever  the  two 
sets  of  effects  (whether  really  or  only  nominally  different)  can  be  recognized  in 
the  same  body,  the  directions  of  maximum  eflfect,  and  also  those  of  minimum 
eflfect,  will  be  found  to  coincide. — November  23,  1848. 


128 


Magneoptic  force.  [Series  XXII. 


2609.  There  is  a  general  and,  as  it  appears  to  me,  important 
relation  between  Pliicker's  magneto-optical  results  and  those  1 
formerly  obtained  with  heavy  glass  and  other  bodies  (2152, 
&c.).  When  any  of  these  bodies  are  subject  to  strong  induction 
under  the  influence  of  the  magnetic  or  electric  forces,  they  ac- 
quire a  peculiar  state,  in  which  they  can  influence  a  polarized 
ray  of  light.  The  effect  is  a  rotation  of  the  ray,  if  it  be 
passed  through  the  substance  parallel  to  the  lines  of  magnetic 
force,  or  in  other  words,  in  the  axial  direction ;  but  if  it  be 
passed  in  the  equatorial  direction,  no  effect  is  produced.  Tlie 
equatorial  plane,  therefore,  is  that  plane  in  which  the  condition 
of  the  molecular  forces  is  the  least  disturbed  as  respects  their 
influence  on  Hght.  So  also  in  Pliicker's  results,  the  optic  axis, 
or  the  optic  axes,  if  there  be  two,  go  into  that  plane  under  the 
same  magnetic  influence,  they  also  being  the  lines  in  which 
there  is  the  least,  or  no  action  on  polarized  light. 

2610.  If  a  piece  of  heavy  glass,  or  a  portion  of  water,  could 
be  brought  beforehand  into  this  constrained  condition,  and  then 
placed  in  the  magnetic  field,  I  think  there  can  be  no  doubt  that 
it  would  move,  if  allowed  to  do  so,  and  place  itself  naturally,  so 
that  the  plane  of  no  action  on  light  should  be  equatorial,  just  as 
Pliicker  shows  that  a  crystal  of  calcareous  spar  or  tourmaline 
does  in  his  experiments.  And,  as  in  his  case,  the  magnetic  or 
diamagnetic  character  of  the  bodies,  makes  no  difference  in  the 
general  result ;  so  in  my  experiments,  the  optical  effect  is  pro- 
duced in  the  same  direction,  and  subject  to  the  same  laws,  with 
both  classes  of  substances  (2185.  2187.). 

2611.  But  though  thus  generally  alike  in  this  great  and 
leading  point,  there  is  still  a  vast  difference  in  the  disposition  of 
the  forces  in  the  heavy  glass  and  the  crystal ;  and  there  is  a  still 
greater  difference  in  this,  that  the  heavy  glass  takes  up  its 
state  only  for  a  time  by  constraint  and  under  induction,  whilst 
the  crystal  possesses  it  freely,  naturally  and  permanently.  In 
both  cases,  however,  M^hether  natural  or  induced,  it  is  a  state  of 
the  particles ;  and  comparing  the  effect  on  light  of  the  glass 
under  constraint  with  that  of  the  crystal  at  liberty,  it  indicates 
a  power  in  the  magnet  of  inducing  something  like  that  condition 
in  the  particles  of  matter  which  is  necessary  for  crystallization  ; 
and  that  even  in  the  particles  of  fluids  (2184.). 

2612.  If  there  be  any  weight  in  these  considerations,  and  if 


Oct.  1848.]  Magnecrystallic  action. 


129 


the  forces  manifested  in  the  crystals  of  bismuth  and  Iceland 
spar  be  the  same  (2607-),  then  there  is  further  reason  for  be- 
lieving: that,  in  the  case  of  bismuth  and  the  other  metals  named, 
there  is,  when  they  are  subjected  to  the  power  of  the  magnet, 
both  an  induced  condition  of  force  (2584.),  and  also  a  pre-ex- 
isting force  (2577  ).  The  latter  may  be  distinguished  as  the 
crystalline  force,  and  is  shown,  first,  by  such  bodies  exhibiting 
optic  axes  and  lines  of  force  when  not  under  induction  ;  by  the 
symmetric  condition  of  the  whole  mass,  produced  under  circum- 
stances of  ordinary  occurrence ;  and  by  the  fixity  of  the  line  of 
magnecrystallic  force  in  the  bodies  shown  experimentally  to 
possess  it. 

2613.  Though  I  have  spoken  of  the  magnecrystallic  axis  as  a 
given  line  or  direction,  yet  I  would  not  wish  to  be  understood 
as  supposing  that  the  force  decreases,  or  state  changes,  in  an 
equal  ratio  all  round  from  it.  It  is  more  probable  that  the 
variation  is  different  in  degree  in  different  directions,  dependent 
on  the  powers  which  give  difference  of  form  to  the  crystals. 
The  knowledge  of  the  disposition  of  the  force  can  be  ascertained 
minutely  hereafter,  by  the  use  of  good  crystals,  an  unchangeable 
ordinary  magnet  (2485.  2528.),  or  a  regulated  electro-magnet, 
flat-faced  poles  (2463.),  and  torsion  (2500.  2530.). 

2614.  I  cannot  conclude  this  series  of  researches  without 
remarking  how  rapidly  the  knowledge  of  molecular  forces  grows 
upon  us,  and  how  strikingly  every  investigation  tends  to  develope 
more  and  more  their  importance,  and  their  extreme  attraction 
as  an  object  of  study.  A  few  years  ago  magnetism  was  to  us  an 
occult  power,  affecting  only  a  few  bodies ;  now  it  is  found  to 
influence  all  bodies,  and  to  possess  the  most  intimate  relations 
with  electricity,  heat,  chemical  action,  light,  crystallization,  and, 
through  it,  with  the  forces  concerned  in  cohesion  ;  and  we  may, 
in  the  present  state  of  things,  well  feel  urged  to  continue  in 
our  labours,  encouraged  by  the  hope  of  bringing  it  into  a  bond 
of  union  \\ith  gravity  itself. 

Royal  Institution, 
October  20,  1848. 


VOL.  III. 


IC 


130 


Magnecrystallic  action.       [Series  XXII. 


^  vi.  Note. — On  the  position  of  a  crystal  of  sulphate  of  iron  in 

the  magnetic  field. 

Received  December  7,  1848. — Read  December  7,  1848. 

Fig.  6. 

2615.  Though  effects  of  the  following 
nature  are  general,  yet  I  think  it  con- 
venient to  state  that  I  obtained  them 
chiefly  by  the  use  of  magnetic  poles 
(2247. )i  the  form  of  which  is  given  in 
the  plan  and  side-view  annexed  (fig.  6.). 
The  crystals  submitted  to  their  action 
were  suspended  by  cocoon  silk,  so  as  to 
be  level  with  the  upper  surface  of  the  poles. 

2616.  A  prismatic  crystal  of  protosulphate  of  iron  was 
selected,  which  was  nearly  0*9  of  an  inch  in  length,  O'l  in 
breadth,  and  0'05  in  thickness  ;  by  examination  the  magnecry- 
stallic axis  was  found  to  coincide  with  the  thickness,  and  there- 
fore to  be  perpendicular,  or  nearly  so  (2546.),  to  the  plate. 
Being  suspended  as  above  described,  and  the  magnet  (2247.) 
excited  by  ten  pair  of  Grove's  plates,  the  crystal  stood  trans- 
verse, or  with  its  magnecrystallic  axis  parallel  to  the  axis  of 
magnetic  force,  when  the  distance  between  the  poles  was  2*25 
inches  or  more  ;  but  when  the  distance  was  about  2  inches  or 
less,  then  it  stood  with  its  length  axial,  or  nearly  so,  and  its 
magnecrystallic  axis  therefore  transverse  to  the  lines  of  magnetic 
force.  In  the  intermediate  distances  between  2  and  2-25  inches, 
the  prism  assumed  an  obhque  position  (2634.),  more  or  less 
inclined  to  the  axial  line,  and  so  passing  gradually  from  the  one 
position  to  the  other.  This  intermediate  distance  I  will  for  the 
present  call  n  (neutral)  distance. 

26 17.  If  the  poles  be  2  inches  apart  and  the  crystal  be 
gradually  lowered,  it  passes  through  the  same  intermediate 
oblique  positions  into  the  transverse  position ;  or  if  the  crystal 
be  raised,  the  same  transitions  occur ;  at  any  less  distance  the 
changes  are  the  same,  but  later.  They  occur  more  rapidly 
when  the  crystal  is  raised  than  when  it  is  lowered ;  but  this  is 
only  because  of  the  unsymmetric  disposition  and  intensity  of  the 
lines  of  magnetic  force  around  the  magnetic  axis,  due  to  the 
horse-shoe  fbrm  of  the  magnet  and  shape  of  the  poles.    If  two 


Dec.  1848.]  Protomlphate  of  iron.  131 

cylinder  magnets  with  equal  eouical  terminations  were  employed, 
there  is  no  doubt  that  for  equal  amounts  of  elevation  or  de- 
pression, corresponding  changes  would  take  place  in  the  position 
of  the  crystal. 

2618.  These  changes  however  are  not  due  to  mere  diminution 
of  the  magnetic  force  by  distance,  but  to  differences  in  the/orms 
or  direction  of  the  resultants  of  force.  This  is  shown  by  the 
fact  that,  if  the  crystal  be  left  in  its  first  position,  and  so  point- 
ing with  the  length  axially,  no  diminution  of  the  force  of  the 
magnet  alters  the  position ;  thus,  whether  one  or  ten  pair  of 
plates  be  used  to  excite  the  magnet,  the  n  distance  (2616.) 
remains  unchanged  ;  and  even  descending  to  the  use  of  an  ordi- 
nary horse-shoe  magnet,  I  have  found  the  same  result. 

2619.  Variation  in  the  length  of  the  prismatic  crystal  has  an 
important  influence  over  the  result.  As  the  crystal  is  shorter, 
the  distance  n  diminishes,  all  the  other  phaenomena  remaining  the 
same.  A  crystal  0'7  of  an  inch  long,  but  thicker  than  the  last, 
had  for  its  maximum  n  distance  1*7  inch.  A  still  shorter  crys- 
tal had  for  its  maximum  n  distance  1*1  inch.  In  all  these  cases 
variation  of  the  force  of  the  magnet  caused  no  sensible  change. 

2620.  Variation  in  that  dimension  of  the  crystal  coincident 
with  the  magnecrystallic  axis  affected  the  n  distance  :  thus,  in- 
crease in  the  length  of  the  magnecrystallic  axis  diminished  the 
distance,  and  diminution  of  it  in  that  direction  increased  the 
distance.  This  was  shown  in  two  ways ;  first,  by  placing  a 
second  prismatic  crystal  by  the  side  of  the  former  in  a  sym- 
metric position  (2636.),  which  reduced  the  n  distance  to  between 
1*75  and  2  inches  ;  and  next,  by  employing  two  crystals  in  suc- 
cession of  the  same  length  but  different  thicknesses.  The 
thicker  one  had  the  smaller  n  distance. 

2621.  Variation  in  the  depth  of  the  crystal,  i.  e,  its  vertical 
dimension,  did  not  produce  any  sensible  effect  on  the  n  di- 
stance: nor  by  theory  should  it  do  so,  until  the  extension  up- 
wards or  downwards  brings  the  upper  or  lower  parts  into  the 
condition  of  raised  or  depressed  portions  (2617-). 

2622.  Variation  in  the  form  of  the  poles  affects  the  n  distance. 
As  they  are  more  acute,  the  distance  increases ;  and  as  they  are 
more  obtuse  up  to  flat-faced  poles  (2463.),  the  distance  dimi- 
nishes. 

2623.  With  the  shorter  crystals,  or  with  obtuse  poles,  it  is 

K  2 


132 


Magnecnjstallic  action.       [Series  XXII. 


often  necessary  to  diminish  the  power  of  the  magnet,  or  else 
the  crystal  is  liable  to  be  drawn  to  the  one  or  other  pole.  This, 
however,  may  be  avoided  by  employing  a  vertical  axis  which  is 
confined  below  as  well  as  above  (2554.)  ;  and  then  the  difference 
in  strength  of  the  magnet  is  shown  to  be  indifferent  to  the 
results,  or  very  nearly  so. 


2624.  These  effects  may  probably  be  due  to  the  essential 
difference  which  exists  between  the  ordinary  magnetic  and  the 
magnecrystallic  action,  in  that  the  first  is  polar,  and  the  second 
only  axial  (2472.)  in  character.  If  a  piece  of  magnetic  matter, 
iron  for  instance,  be  in  the  magnetic  field,  it  immediately  be- 
comes polar  (i.  e.  has  terminations  of  different  qualities).  If 
many  iron  particles  be  there,  they  all  become  polar  ;  and  if  they 
be  free  to  move,  arrange  themselves  in  the  direction  of  the  axial 
line,  being  joined  to  each  other  by  contrary  poles ;  and  by  that 
the  polarity  of  the  extreme  particles  is  increased.  Now  this 
does  not  appear  to  be  at  all  the  case  with  particles  under  the 
influence  of  the  magnecrystallic  force ;  the  force  seems  to  be 
altogether  axial,  and  hence  probably  the  difference  above,  and 
in  many  other  results. 

2625.  Thus,  if  four  or  more  little  cubes  of  iron  be  suspended 
in  a  magnetic  field  of  equal  force  (2465.),  they  will  become 
polar;  if  also  four  similar  cuhes  of  crystallized  bismuth  be  simi- 
larly circumstanced,  they  will  be  affected  and  point.  If  the 
iron  cubes  be  arranged  together  in  the  direction  of  the  equatorial 
line,  they  will  form  an  aggregate  in  a  position  of  unstable  equi- 
librium, and  will  immediately,  as  a  whole,  turn  and  point  with 
the  length  axially  ;  whereas  the  bismuth  cubes  by  such  approxi- 
mation will  suffer  no  sensible  change. 

2626.  The  extreme  (and  the  other)  associated  cubes  of  the 
elongated  iron  arrangement  now  have  a  polar  force  above  that 
which  they  had  before  ;  and  the  whole  group  serves,  as  it  were, 
as  a  conductor  for  the  lines  of  magnetic  power ;  for  many  of 
them  concentrate  upon  the  iron,  and  the  intensity  of  power  is 
much  stronger  between  the  ends  of  the  iron  arrangement  and 
the  magnetic  poles,  than  it  is  in  other  parts  of  the  magnetic 
field.  Such  is  not  the  case  with  the  bismuth  cubes ;  for  how- 
ever they  be  arranged,  the  intensity  of  force  in  the  magnetic 


Dec.  1848.]  Proto-sulphate  of  iron.  .  1.33 

field  is,  as  far  as.  experiments  have  yet  gone,  unaffected  by 
them  ;  and  the  intensity  of  the  molecules  of  the  crystals  appears 
to  remain  the  same.  Hence  the  iron  stands  lengthways  between 
the  poles ;  the  bismuth  crystals,  on  the  contrary,  whether  ar- 
ranged side  by  side,  as  respects  the  magneciystallic  axis,  so  as 
to  stand  as  to  length  equatorially ;  or  end  to  end,  so  as  to  stand 
axially,  are  perfectly  indifferent  in  that  respect,  vibrating  and 
setting  equally  both  ways. 

2627.  A  given  piece  of  iron  when  introduced  into  a  field  of 
equal  magnetic  force,  and  brought  towards  the  pole,  adheres  to 
it  and  disturbs  the  intensity  of  the  field,  producing  a  pointed 
form  of  pole  in  one  part  with  diverging  lines  of  force  :  a  cry- 
stal of  bismuth  vibrates  with  sensibly  equal  force  in  every  part 
of  the  field  (2467.),  and  does  not  disturb  the  distribution  of  the 
power. 

2628.  Considering  all  these  actions  and  conditions,  it  appears 
to  me  that  the  occurrence  of  the  n  distance  with  a  body  which 
is  at  the  same  time  magnetic  and  magnecrystallic,  may  be  traced 
to  that  which  causes  them  and  their  differences,  namely,  the 
polarity  belonging  to  the  magnetic  condition,  and  the  axiality 
belonging  to  the  magnecrystallic  condition.  Thus,  suppose  an 
uniform  magnetic  field  three  inches  from  pole  to  pole,  and  a  bar 
of  magnetic  matter  an  inch  long,  suspended  in  the  middle  of  it; 
by  virtue  of  the  polarity  it  acquires,  it  will  point  axially,  and 
carry  on,  or  conduct,  with  its  mass,  the  magnetic  force,  so  much 
better  than  it  was  conducted  in  the  same  space  before,  that  the 
lines  of  force  between  the  ends  of  this  bar  and  the  magnetic 
poles,  will  be  concentrated  and  made  more  intense  than  any- 
where else  in  the  magnetic  field.  If  the  poles  be  made  to 
approach  towards  the  bar,  this  effect  will  increase,  and  the  bar 
will  conduct  more  and  more  of  the  magnetic  force,  and  point 
with  proportionate  intensity.  It  is  not  merely  that  the  magnetic 
field  becomes  more  intense  by  the  approximation  of  the  poles, 
but  the  proportion  of  force  carried  on  by  the  bar  becomes 
greater  as  compared  to  that  conveyed  onwards  by  an  equal  space 
in  the  magnetic  field  at  its  side. 

2629.  But  if  a  similar  bar  of  magnecrystallic  substance  be 
placed  in  the  magnetic  field,  its  power  does  not  rise  in  the  same 
manner,  or  in  the  same  great  proportion,  by  approximation  of 
the  poles.    There  can  be  no  doubt  that  such  approximation  in- 


134 


Maffnecrystallic  action. 


[Series  XXII. 


creases  the  intensity  of  the  lines  of  force,  and  therefore  increases 
the  intensity  of  the  magneto-crystaUic  state ;  but  this  state  does 
not  appear  to  be  due  to  polarity,  and  the  bar  does  not  convey 
more  power  through  it  than  is  conveyed  onwards  elsewhere 
through  an  equal  space  in  the  magnetic  field.  Hence  its  direc- 
tive force  does  not  increase  in  the  same  rapid  degree  as  the 
directive  force  of  the  magnetic  bar  just  referred  to. 

2630.  If  then  we  take  a  bar  which,  like  a  prism  of  sulphate 
of  iron,  is  magnetic,  and  also  magnecrystallic,  having  the  mag- 
necrystallic  axis  perpendicular  to  its  length,  such  a  bar,  properly 
suspended,  ought  to  have  an  n  distance  of  the  poles,  within 
which  the  forces  ought  to  be  nearly  in  equilibrium  ;  whilst  at  a 
greater  distance  of  the  poles,  the  magnecrystallic  force  ought 
to  predominate and  at  a  lesser  distance,  the  magnetic  force 
ought  to  have  the  advantage;  simply,  because  the  magnetic 
force,  in  consequence  of  the  true  polarity  of  the  molecules, 
grows  up  more  rapidly  and  diminishes  more  rapidly  than  the 
magneto-crystaUic  force. 

2631.  This  view,  also,  is  consistent  with  the  fact  that  variation 
of  the  force  of  the  magnet  does  not  affect  the  n  distance  (2618. 
2619.) ;  for,  whether  the  force  be  doubled  or  quadrupled,  both 
the  magnetic  and  magneto-crystallic  forces  are  at  the  same  time 
doubled  or  quadrupled  ;  and  their  proportion  therefore  remains 
the  same. 

2632.  The  raising  or  lowering  of  the  crystal  above  or  below 
the  line  of  maximum  magnetic  force  is  manifestly  equivalent  in 
principle  to  the  separation  of  the  magnetic  poles ;  and  therefore 
should  produce  corresponding  effects :  and  that  is  the  case 
(2617.).  Besides  that,  when  the  crystal  is  raised  above  the  level 
of  the  poles,  such  resultants  of  magnetic  force  as  pass  through 
it,  are  no  longer  parallel  to  its  length,  but  more  or  less  curved, 
so  that  they  probably  cannot  act  with  the  same  amount  of 
power  in  throwing  the  whole  crystal  into  a  consistent  polarized 
magnetic  condition,  as  if  they  w'ere  parallel  to  it :  whereas,  as 
respects  the  induction  of  the  magneto-crystallic  condition,  each 
of  the  particles  appears  to  be  affected  independently  of  the 
others;  and,  therefore,  any  loss  of  an  effect  dependent  upon 
joint  action  would  not  be  felt  here. 

2633.  M.  Plucker  told  me,  when  in  England  in  August  last, 
that  the  repulsive  force  on  the  optic  axis  diminishes  and  in- 


Dec.  1848.] 


Proto-sulphate  of  iron. 


135 


creases  less  rapidly  than  the  magnetic  force,  by  change  of  di- 
stance; but  is  not  altered  in  its  proportion  to  the  magnetic 
force  by  employing  a  stronger  or  weaker  magnet.  This  is 
manifestly  the  same  effect  as  that  I  have  been  describing ;  and 
makes  me  still  more  thoroughly  persuaded  that  his  results  and 
mine  are  due  to  one  and  the  same  cause  (2605.  2607.)« 


2634.  I  have  said  that,  within  the  n  distance,  the  crystal  of 
sulphate  of  iron  pointed  more  or  less  obliquely  (2616.);  I  will 
now  state  more  particularly  what  the  circumstances  are.  If  the 
distance  n  be  so  adjusted,  that  the  prismatic  crystal,  which  is  at 
the  time  between  the  magnetic  poles,  shall  make  an  angle  of 
30°  (or  any  quantity)  with  the  axial  line ;  then  it  will  be  found 
that  there  is  another  stable  position,  namely,  the  diametral  posi- 
tion (2461.),  in  which  it  can  stand;  but  that  the  obliquity  is 
always  on  the  same  side  of  the  axial  line  ;  and  that  the  crystal 
will  not  stand  with  the  like  obliquity  of  30°  on  the  opposite 
side  of  the  magnetic  axis. 

2635.  If  the  crystal  be  turned  180°  round  a  vertical  axis,  or 
end  for  end,  then  the  inclination,  and  the  direction  in  which  it 
occui's,  remain  unchanged ;  in  fact,  it  is  simply  giving  the 
crystal  the  diametral  position.  But  if  the  crystal  be  revolved 
180°  round  a  horizontal  axis;  either  that  coinciding  with  its 
length,  which  represents  its  maximum  magnetic  direction;  or 
that  corresponding  with  its  breadth,  and  therefore  with  the 
magnecrystallic  axis  ;  then  the  inclination  is  the  same  in  amount 
as  before,  but  it  is  on  the  other  side  of  the  axial  line. 

2636.  This  is  the  case  with  all  the  prismatic  ci'ystals  of  sul- 
phate of  iron  which  I  have  tried.  The  effect  is  very  determinate; 
and,  as  would  be  expected,  when  two  crystals  correspond  in  the 
direction  of  the  inclination,  they  also  correspond  in  the  position 
of  their  form  and  direction  of  the  various  planes. 

2637.  All  these  variations  of  position  indicate  an  oblique 
resultant  of  setting  force,  derived  from  the  joint  action  of  the 
magnetic  and  magnecrystallic  forces ;  and  would  be  explained 
by  the  supposition,  that  the  magnecrystallic  axis  or  line  of 
maximum  magnecrystallic  force,  was  not  perpendicular  to  the 
chief  planes  of  the  crystal  (or  those  terminating  it),  but  a  little 
inclined  in  the  direction  of  the  length. 


136 


Magnecrystallic  action.       [Series  XXII. 


2638.  Whether  this  be  the  case,  or  whether  the  maximum 
line  of  magnetic  force  may  not,  even,  be  a  little  inclined  to  the 
length  of  the  prism ;  still,  the  n  distance  supplies  an  excellent 
experimental  opportunity  of  examining  this  inclination,  how- 
ever small  its  quantity  may  be;  because  of  the  facility  with 
which  the  influence  of  either  the  one  or  the  other  may  be  made 
predominant  in  any  required  degree. 

Royal  Institution, 
December  5,  1848. 

2639.  Note.  (2591.)  Another  supposition  may  be  thrown  out 
for  consideration.  I  have  already  said  that  the  assumption  of 
a  mere  axial  condition  (2587.  2591.)  would  account  for  the  set 
without  attraction  or  repulsion.  Now  if  we  suppose  it  possible 
that  the  molecules  should  become  polar  in  relation  to  the  north 
and  south  poles  of  the  magnet,  but  with  no  mutual  relation 
amongst  themselves,  then  the  bismuth  or  other  crystal  might  set 
as  if  induced  M'ith  mere  axial  power :  but  it  seems  to  me  very 
improbable  that  polarities  of  a  given  particle  in  a  crystal  should 
be  subject  to  the  influence  of  the  polarities  of  the  distant 
magnet  poles,  and  not  also  to  the  like  polarities  of  the  contigu- 
ous particles. — January  24,  1849. 


137 


TWENTY-THIRD  SERIES'. 

§  29.  On  the  polar  or  other  condition  of  diamagnetic  bodies. 
Received  January  1,— Read  March  7  and  14,  1850. 

2640.  Four  years  ago  I  suggested  that  all  the  phsenomena 
presented  by  diamagnetic  bodies,  when  subjected  to  the  forces 
in  the  magnetic  field,  might  be  accounted  for  by  assuming  that 
they  then  possessed  a  polarity  the  same  in  kind  as,  but  the  re- 
verse in  direction  of,  that  acquired  by  iron,  nickel  and  ordinary 
magnetic  bodies  under  the  same  circumstances  (2429.  2430.). 
This  view  was  received  so  favourably  by  Pliicker,  Reich  and 
others,  and  above  all  by  W.  Weber  ^,  that  I  had  great  hopes  it 
would  be  confirmed;  and  though  certain  experiments  of  my 
own  (2497.)  did  not  increase  that  hope,  still  my  desire  and  ex- 
pectation were  in  that  direction. 

2641.  Whether  bismuth,  copper,  phosphorus,  &c.,  when  in 
the  magnetic  field,  are  polar  or  not,  is  however  an  exceedingly 
important  question ;  and  very  essential  and  great  differences,  in 
the  mode  of  action  of  these  bodies  under  the  one  view  or  the 
other,  must  be  conceived  to  exist.  I  found  that  in  every 
endeavour  to  proceed  by  induction  of  experiment  from  that 
which  is  known  in  this  department  of  science  to  the  unknown, 
so  much  uncertainty,  hesitation  and  discomfort  arose  from  the 
unsettled  state  of  my  mind  on  this  point,  that  I  determined,  if 
possible,  to  arrive  at  some  experimental  proof  either  one  way 
or  the  other.  This  M  as  the  more  needful,  because  of  the  con- 
clusion in  the  affirmative  to  which  Weber  had  come  in  his  very 
philosophical  paper ;  and  so  important  do  I  think  it  for  the 
progress  of  science,  that,  in  those  imperfectly  developed  regions 
of  knowledge,  which  form  its  boundaries,  our  conclusions  and 
deductions  should  not  go  far  beyond,  or  at  all  events  not  aside 

'  Philosophical  Transactions,  1850,  p.  l7l. 

'  Poggendorff's  Annalen,  January  7,  1848,  or  Taylor's  Scientific  Memoirs, 
p. 477. 


138  Supposed  diamayneiic polarity.       [Series  XXIII, 


from  the  results  of  experiment  (except  as  suppositions),  that  I 
do  not  hesitate  to  lay  ray  present  labours,  though  they  arrive  at 
a  negative  result,  before  the  Royal  Society. 

2642.  It  appeared  to  me  that  many  of  the  results  which  had 
been  supposed  to  indicate  a  polar  condition,  were  only  conse- 
quences of  the  law  that  diamagnetic  bodies  tend  to  go  from 
stronger  to  weaker  places  of  action  (2418.)  ;  others  again 
appeared  to  have  their  origin  in  induced  currents  (26.  2338.); 
and  further  consideration  seemed  to  indicate  that  the  differences 
between  these  modes  of  action  and  that  of  a  real  polarity, 
whether  magnetic  or  diamagnetic,  might  serve  as  a  foundation 
on  which  to  base  a  mode  of  investigation,  and  also  to  construct 
an  apparatus  that  might  give  useful  conclusions  and  results  in 
respect  of  this  inquiry.  For,  if  the  polarity  exists  it  must  be  in 
the  particles  and  for  the  time  permanent,  and  therefore  dis- 
tinguishable from  the  momentary  polarity  of  the  mass  due  to 
induced  temporary  currents ;  and  it  must  also  be  distinguishable 
from  ordinary  magnetic  polarity  by  its  contrary  direction. 

2643.  A  straight  wooden  lever,  2  feet  in  length,  was  fixed  by 
an  axis  at  one  end,  and  by  means  of  a  crank  and  wheel  made  to 
vibrate  in  a  horizontal  plane,  so  that  its  free  extremity  passed 
to  and  fro  through  about  2  inches.  Cylinders  or  cores  of 
metal  or  other  substances,  5^  inches  long  and  three  quarters  of 
an  inch  diameter,  were  fixed  in  succession  to  the  end  of  a  brass 
rod  2  feet  long,  which  itself  was  attached  at  the  other  end  to  the 
moving  extremity  of  the  lever,  so  that  the  cylinders  could  be 
moved  to  and  fro  in  the  direction  of  their  length  through  the 
space  of  2  inches.  A  large  cylinder  electro-magnet  was  also 
prepared  (2191.),  the  iron  core  of  which  was  21  inches  long, 
and  1*7  inch  in  diameter;  but  one  end  of  this  core  was  made 
smaller  for  the  length  of  1  inch,  being  in  that  part  only  1  inch 
in  diariieter. 

2644.  On  to  this  reduced  part  was  fixed  a  hollow  helix  con- 
sisting of  516  feet  of  fine  covered  copper  wire  :  it  was  3  inches 
long,  2  inches  external  diameter,  and  1  inch  internal  diameter: 
when  in  its  place,  1  inch  of  the  central  space  was  occupied  by 
the  reduced  end  of  the  electro-magnet  core  which  carried  it;  and 
the  magnet  and  helix  were  both  placed  concentric  with  the 
metal  cylinder  above  mentioned,  and  at  such  a  distance  that  the 
latter,  in  its  motion,  would  move  within  the  helix  in  the  di- 


Jan.  1850.] 


Induction  appuralus  employed. 


139 


140  Supposed  diamagneiic  polarity.       [Series  XXIII. 

rection  of  its  axis,  approaching  to  and  receding  from  the  electro- 
magnet in  rapid  or  slow  succession.  The  least  and  greatest 
distances  of  the  moving  cylinder  from  the  magnet  during  the 
journey  were  one-eighth  of  an  inch  and  2*2  inches.  The  object 
of  course  was  to  observe  an}-^  influence  upon  the  experimental 
helix  of  fine  wire  which  the  metal  cylinders  might  exert,  either 
whilst  moving  to  or  from  the  magnet,  or  at  different  distances 
from  it^ 

2645.  The  extremities  of  the  experimental  helix  wire  were 
connected  with  a  very  delicate  galvanometer,  placed  18  or  20 
feet  from  the  machine,  so  as  to  be  unaffected  directly  by  the 
electro-magnet;  but  a  commutator  was  interposed  between 
them.  This  commutator  was  moved  by  the  wooden  lever 
(2643.),  and  as  the  electric  currents  which  would  arrive  at  it 
from  the  experimental  helix,  in  a  complete  cycle  of  motion  or  to 
and  fro  action  of  the  metal  cylinder  (2643.),  would  consist  of 
two  contrary  portions,  so  the  office  of  this  commutator  was, 
sometimes  to  take  up  these  portions  in  succession  and  send 
them  on  in  one  consistent  current  to  the  galvanometer,  and  at 
other  times  to  oppose  them  and  to  neutralize  their  result ;  and 
therefore  it  was  made  adjustible,  so  as  to  change  at  any  period 
of  the  time  or  part  of  the  motion. 

2646.  With  such  an  arrangement  as  this,  it  is  known  that, 
however  powerful  the  magnet,  and  however  delicate  the  other 
parts  of  the  apparatus,  no  effect  will  be  produced  at  the  gal- 
vanometer as  long  as  the  magnet  does  not  change  in  force,  or  in 
its  action  upon  neighbouring  bodies,  or  in  its  distance  from,  or 
relation  to,  the  experimental  helix ;  but  the  introduction  of  a 
piece  of  iron  into  the  helix,  or  anything  else  that  can  influence 
or  be  influenced  by  the  magnet,  can,  or  ought  to,  show  a  corre- 
sponding influence  upon  the  helix  and  galvanometer.  My  ap- 
paratus I  should  imagine,  indeed,  to  be  almost  the  same  in 
principle  and  practice  as  that  of  M.  Weber  (2640.),  except  that 
it  gives  me  contrary  results. 

2647-  But  to  obtain  correct  conclusions,  it  is  most  essential 
that  extreme  precaution  should  be  taken  in  relation  to  many 

'  It  is  very  probable  that  if  the  metals  were  made  into  cylinders  shorter, 
but  of  larger  diameter  than  those  described  above,  and  used  with  a  corre- 
sponding wider  helix,  better  results  than  those  I  have  obtained  would  be 
acquired. 


Jan.  1850.] 


Apparatus  employed. 


141 


points  which  at  first  may  seem  unimportant.  All  parts  of  the 
apparatus  should  have  perfect  steadiness,  and  be  fixed  almost 
with  the  care  due  to  an  astronomical  instrument;  for  any 
motion  of  any  portion  of  it  is,  from  the  construction,  sure  to 
synchronize  with  the  motion  of  the  commutator ;  and  portions 
of  eflfect,  inconceivably  small,  are  then  gathered  up  and  made 
manifest  as  a  whole  at  the  galvanometer;  and  thus,  without 
care,  errors  might  be  taken  for  real  and  correct  results.  There- 
fore, in  my  arrangements,  the  machine  (2643,  &c.),  the  magnet 
and  helix,  and  the  galvanometer  stood  upon  separate  tables,  and 
these  again  upon  a  stone  floor  laid  upon  the  earth  ;  and  the 
table  carrying  the  machine  was  carefully  strutted  to  neighbour- 
ing stone-work. 

2648.  Again,  the  apparatus  should  itself  be  perfectly  firm 
and  without  shake  in  its  motion,  and  yet  easy  and  free.  No  iron 
should  be  employed  in  any  of  the  moving  parts.  I  have  springs 
to  receive  and  convert  a  portion  of  the  momentum  of  the  whole 
at  the  end  of  the  to  and  fro  journey;  but  it  is  essential  that 
these  should  be  of  hammered  brass  or  copper. 

2649.  It  is  absolutely  necessary  that  the  cylinder  or  core  in 
its  motion  should  not  in  the  least  degree  disturb  or  shake  the 
experimental  hehx  and  the  magnet.  Such  a  shake  may  easily 
take  place  and  yet  (without  much  experience)  not  be  perceived. 
It  is  important  to  have  the  cores  of  such  bodies  as  bismuth, 
phosphorus,  copper,  &c.,  as  large  as  may  be,  but  I  have  not  found 
it  safe  to  have  less  than  one-eighth  of  an  inch  of  space  between 
them  and  the  interior  of  the  experimental  helix.  In  order  to 
float,  as  it  w^ere,  the  core  in  the  air,  it  is  convenient  to  suspend 
it  in  the  bight  or  turn  of  a  fine  copper  wire  passing  once  round 
it,  the  ends  of  which  rise  up,  and  are  made  fast  to  two  fixed 
points  at  equal  heights  but  wide  apart,  so  that  the  wire  has  a 
V  form.  This  suspension  keeps  the  core  parallel  to  itself  in 
every  part  of  its  motion. 

2650.  The  magnet,  when  excited,  is  urged  by  an  electric 
current  from  five  pairs  of  Grove's  plates,  and  is  then  very 
powerful.  When  the  battery  is  not  connected  with  it,  it  still 
remains  a  magnet  of  feeble  power,  and  when  thus  employed  may 
be  referred  to  as  in  the  residual  state.  If  employed  in  the 
residual  state,  its  power  may  for  the  time  be  considered  con- 
stant, and  the  experimental  helix  may  at  any  moment  be  con- 


142  Supposed  diamagnetic  polarity.       [Series  XXIIl. 

nected  with  the  galvanometer  without  any  current  appearing 
there.  But  if  the  magnet  be  employed  in  the  excited  state, 
certain  important  precautions  are  necessary ;  for  upon  connect- 
ing the  magnet  with  the  battery  and  then  connecting  the  ex- 
perimental helix  with  the  galvanometer,  a  current  will  appear 
at  the  latter,  which  will,  in  certain  cases,  continue  for  a  minute 
or  more,  and  which  has  the  appearance  of  being  derived  at  once 
from  that  of  the  battery.  It  is  not  so  produced,  however,  but  is 
due  to  the  time  occupied  by  the  iron  core  in  attaining  its  maxi- 
mum magnetic  condition  (2170.  2332.),  during  the  whole  of 
which  it  continues  to  act  upon  the  experimental  helix,  producing 
a  current  in  it.  This  time  varies  with  several  circumstances, 
and  in  the  same  electro-magnet  varies  especially  with  the  period 
during  which  the  magnet  has  been  out  of  use.  When  first 
employed,  after  two  or  three  days'  rest,  it  will  amount  to  eighty 
or  ninety  seconds,  or  more.  On  breaking  battery  contact  and 
immediately  renewing  it,  the  effect  will  be  repeated,  but  occupy 
only  twenty  or  thirty  seconds.  On  a  third  intermission  and 
renewal  of  the  current,  it  will  appear  for  a  still  shorter  period  ; 
and  when  the  magnet  has  been  used  at  short  intervals  for  some 
time,  it  seems  capable  of  receiving  its  maximum  power  almost 
at  once.  In  every  experiment  it  is  necessary  to  wait  until  the 
effect  is  shown  by  the  galvanometer  to  be  over;  otherwise  the 
last  remains  of  such  an  effect  might  be  mistaken  for  a  result  of 
polarity,  or  some  peculiar  action  of  the  bismuth  or  other  body 
under  investigation. 

2651.  The  galvanometer  employed  was  made  by  Ruhmkorff 
and  was  very  sensible.  The  needles  were  strengthened  in  their 
action  and  rendered  so  nearly  equal,  that  a  single  vibration  to 
the  right  or  to  the  left  occupied  from  sixteen  to  twenty 
seconds.  When  experimenting  with  such  bodies  as  bismuth 
or  phosphorus,  the  place  of  the  needle  was  observed  through  a 
lens.  The  perfect  communication  in  all  parts  of  the  cii'cuit  was 
continually  ascertained  by  a  feeble  thermo-electric  pair,  warmed 
by  the  fingers.  This  was  done  also  for  every  position  of  the 
commutator,  where  the  film  of  oxide  formed  on  any  part  by  two 
or  three  days'  rest  was  quite  sufficient  to  intercept  a  feeble 
current. 

2652.  In  order  to  bring  the  phsenomena  afforded  by  magnetic 
and  diamagnetic  bodies  into  direct  relation,  I  have  not  so  much 


Jan.  1S50.]         Magnetic  and  diamagnetic  cores.  143 

noted  the  currents  produced  in  the  experimental  helix,  as  the 
effects  obtained  at  the  galvanometer.  It  is  to  be  understood, 
that  the  standard  of  deviation,  as  to  direction,  has  always  been 
that  produced  by  an  iron  wire  moving  in  the  same  direction  at 
the  experimental  helix,  and  with  the  same  condition  of  the  com- 
mutator and  connecting  wires,  as  the  piece  of  bismuth  or  other 
body  whose  effects  were  to  be  observed  and  compared. 

2653.  A  thin  glass  tube,  of  the  given  size  (2643.),  5i>  by 
I  .inches,  was  filled  with  a  saturated  solution  of  protosulphate  of 
iron,  and  employed  as  the  experimental  core  :  the  velocity  given 
to  the  machine  at  this  and  all  average  times  of  experiment  was 
such  as  to  cause  five  or  six  approaches  and  withdrawals  of  the 

*  core  in  one  second ;  yet  the  solution  produced  no  sensible  indi- 
cation at  the  galvanometer.  A  piece  of  magnetic  glass  tube 
(2354.),  and  a  core  of  foolscap  paper,  magnetic  between  the 
poles  of  the  electro-magnet,  were  equally  inefficient.  A  tube 
filled  with  small  crystals  of  protosulphate  of  iron  caused  the 
needle  to  move  about  2°,  and  cores  formed  out  of  single  large 
crystals,  or  symmetric  groups  of  crystals  of  sulphate  of  iron, 
produced  the  same  effect.  Red  oxide  of  iron  (colcothar)  pro- 
duced the  least  possible  effect.  Iron  scales  and  metallic  iron 
(the  latter  as  a  thin  wire)  produced  large  effects. 

2654.  Whenever  the  needle  moved,  it  was  consistent  in  its 
direction  with  the  effect  of  a  magnetic  body  ;  but  in  many  cases 
with  known  magnetic  bodies,  the  motion  was  little  or  none. 
This  proves  that  such  an  arrangement  is  by  no  means  so  good 
a  test  of  magnetic  polarity  as  the  use  of  a  simple  or  an  astatic 
needle.  This  deficiency  of  poM-er  in  that  respect  does  not  inter- 
fere with  its  ability  to  search  into  the  nature  of  the  phsenomena 
that  appear  in  the  experiments  of  Weber,  Reich  and  others. 

2655.  Other  metals  than  iron  were  now  employed  and  with 
perfect  success.  If  they  w-ere  magnetic,  as  nickel  and  cobalt, 
the  deflection  was  in  the  same  direction  as  for  iron.  When  the 
metals  were  diamagnetic,  the  deflection  was  in  the  contrary 
direction;  and  for  some  of  the  metals,  as  copper,  silver  and 
gold,  it  amounted  to  60°  or  70°,  which  was  permanently  sus- 
tamed  as  long  as  the  machine  continued  to  work.  But  the 
deflection  was  not  the  greatest  for  the  most  diamagnetic  sub- 
stances, as  bismuth  or  antimony,  or  phosphorus ;  on  the  con- 


Supposed  diamagneiic  j^olarity.        [Series  XXI II. 


trary,  I  have  not  been  able  to  assure  myself,  up  to  tliis  time, 
that  these  three  bodies  can  produce  any  effect.  Thus  far  the 
effect  has  been  proportionate  to  the  conducting  power  of  the 
substance  for  electricity.  Gold,  silver  and  copper  have  pro- 
duced large  deflections,  lead  and  tin  less.  Platina  very  little. 
Bismuth  and  antimony  none. 

2656.  Hence  there  was  every  reason  to  believe  that  the 
effects  were  produced  by  the  currents  induced  in  the  mass  of  the 
moving  metals,  and  not  by  any  polarity  of  their  particles.  I 
proceeded  therefore  to  test  this  idea  by  different  conditions  of 
the  cores  and  the  apparatus. 

2657.  In  the  first  place,  if  produced  by  induced  currents,  the 
great  proportion  of  these  would  exist  in  the  part  of  the  core 
near  to  the  dominant  magnet,  and  but  little  in  the  more  distant' 
parts  ;  whereas  in  a  substance  like  iron,  the  polarity  which  the 
M'hole  assumes  makes  length  a  more  important  element.  I 
therefore  shortened  the  core  of  copper  from  h\  inches  (2643.)  to 
2  inches,  and  found  the  effect  not  sensibly  diminished  ;  even 
when  1  inch  long  it  was  little  less  than  before.  On  the  contrary, 
when  a  fine  iron  wire,  5i  inches  in  length,  was  used  as  core,  its 
effects  were  strong ;  when  the  length  was  reduced  to  2  inches, 
they  were  greatly  diminished ;  and  again,  with  a  length  of 
1  inch,  still  further  greatly  reduced.  It  is  not  difficult  to  con- 
struct a  core  of  copper,  with  a  fine  iron  wire  in  its  axis,  so  that 
when  above  a  certain  length  it  should  produce  the  effects  of  iron, 
and  beneath  tliat  length  the  effects  of  copper. 

2658.  In  the  next  place,  if  the  effect  were  produced  by 
induced  currents  in  the  mass  (2642.),  division  of  the  mass  would 
stop  these  currents  and  so  alter  the  effect;  whereas  if  produced 
by  a  true  diamagnetic  polarity,  division  of  the  mass  would  not 
affect  the  polarity  seriously,  or  in  its  essential  nature  (2430.). 
Some  copper  filings  were  therefore  digested  for  a  few  daj^s  in 
dilute  sulphuric  acid  to  remove  any  adhering  iron,  then-  well- 
washed  and  dried,  and  afterwards  warmed  and  stirred  in  the  air, 
until  it  was  seen  by  the  orange  colour  that  a  very  thin  film  of 
oxide  had  formed  upon  them :  they  were  finally  introduced  into 
a  glass  tube  (2653.)  and  employed  as  a  core.  It  produced  no 
effect  whatever,  but  was  now  as  inactive  as  bismuth. 

2659.  The  copper  may  however  be  divided  so  as  either  to 
interfere  with  the  assumed  currents  or  not,  at  pleasure.  Fine 


Jan.  1850.] 


Effects  of  division. 


145 


copper  wire  was  cut  up  into  lengths  of  Sg^  inches,  and  as  many 
of  these  associated  together  as  would  form  a  compact  cylinder 
three-quarters  of  an  inch  in  diameter  (2643.) ;  it  produced  no 
effect  at  the  galvanometer.  Another  copper  core  was  prepared 
by  associating  together  many  discs  of  thin  copper  plate,  three- 
quarters  of  an  inch  in  diameter,  and  this  affected  the  galva- 
nometer, holding  its  needle  25°  or  30°  from  zei'o. 

2660.  I  made  a  solid  helix  cylinder,  three-quarters  of  an  inch 
in  diameter  and  2  inches  long,  of  covered  copper  wire,  one-six- 
teenth of  an  inch  thick,  and  employed  this  as  the  experimental 
core.  When  the  two  ends  of  its  wire  were  unconnected,  there 
was  no  effect  upon  the  experimental  helix,  and  consequently 
none  at  the  galvanometer;  but  when  the  ends  were  soldered 

.  together,  the  needle  was  well  affected.  In  the  first  condition, 
the  currents,  which  tended  to  be  formed  in  the  mass  of  mo^dng 
metal,  could  not  exist  because  the  metal  circuit  was  interrupted; 
in  the  second  they  could,  because  the  circuit  was  not  inter- 
rupted; and  such  division  as  remained  did  not  interfere  to 
prevent  the  currents. 

2661.  The  same  results  were  obtained  with  other  metals.  A 
core  cylinder  of  gold,  made  of  half-sovereigns,  was  very  power- 
ful in  its  effect  on  the  galvanometer.  A  cylinder  of  silver, 
made  of  sixpenny  pieces,  was  very  effectual;  but  a  cylinder 
made  of  precipitated  silver,  pressed  into  a  glaiss  tube  as  closely 
as  possible,  gave  no  indications  of  action  whatever.  The  same 
results  were  obtained  with  disc  cylinders  of  tin  and  lead,  the 
effects  being  proportionate  to  the  condition  of  tin  and  lead  as 
bad  conductors  (2655.). 

2662.  When  iron  was  divided,  the  effects  were  exactly  the 
reverse  in  kind.  It  was  necessary  to  use  a  much  coarser  galva- 
nometer and  apparatus  for  the  purpose  ;  but  that  being  done, 
the  employment  of  a  solid  iron  core,  and  of  another  of  the  same 
size  or  weight  formed  of  lengths  of  fine  iron  wire  (2659.), 
showed  that  the  division  had  occasioned  no  inferiority  in  the 
latter.  The  excellent  experimental  researches  of  Dove  ^  on  the 
electricity  of  induction,  will  show  that  this  ought  to  be  the  case. 

2663.  H  ence  the  result  of  division  in  the  diamagnetic  metals  is 
altogether  of  a  nature  to  confirm  the  conclusion,  that  the  effects 

'  Taylor's  Scientific  Memoirs,  v.  p.  129.  I  do  not  see  a  date  to  the  paper. 
VOL.  III.  V 


146  Supposed  diamagnetic polarity .  .     [Series  XXIII. 

produced  by  them  are  due  to  induced  currents  moving  through 
their  masses,  and  not  to  any  polarity  correspondent  in  its  general 
nature  (though  opposed  in  its  direction)  to  that  of  iron. 

2664.  In  the  third  place  (2656.),  another  and  very  important 
distinction  in  the  actions  of  a  diamagnetic  metal  may  be  experi- 
mentally established  according  as  they  may  be  due  either  to  a 
true  polarity,  or  merely  to  the  presence  of  temporary  induced 
currents ;  and  as  for  the  consideration  of  this  point  diamagnetic 
and  magnetic  polarity  are  the  same,  the  point  may  best  be 
considered,  at  present,  in  relation  to  iron.  ^ 

2665.  If  a  core  of  any  kind  be  advanced  tow^ards  the  domi- 
nant magnet  and  vidthdravs'n  from  it  by  a  motion  of  uniform 
velocity,  then  a  complete  journey,  or  to  and  from  action,  might 
be  divided  into  four  parts  ;  the  to,  the  stop  after  it ;  the  from, 
and  the  stop  succeeding  that.  If  a  core  of  iron  make  this 
journey,  its  end  tovpards  the  dominant  magnet  becomes  a  pole, 
rising  in  force  until  at  the  nearest  distance,  and  falling  in  force 
until  at  the  greatest  distance.  Both  this  effect  and  its  pro- 
gression inwards  and  outwards,  cause  currents  to  be  induced  in 
the  surrounding  helix,  and  these  currents  are  in  one  direction 
as  the  core  advances,  and  in  the  contrary  direction  as  it  recedes. 
In  reality,  however,  the  iron  does  not  travel  with  a  constant 
velocity;  for,  because  of  the  communication  of  motion  from  a 
revolving  crank  at  the  machine  (2643.),  it,  in  the  to  part  of  the 
journey,  gradually  rises  from  a  state  of  rest  to  a  maximum 
velocity,  which  is  half-way,  and  then  as  gradually  sinks  to  rest 
again  near  the  magnet: — and  the  from  part  of  the  journey 
undergoes  the  same  variations.  Now  as  the  maximum  effect 
upon  the  surrounding  experimental  helix  depends  upon  the 
velocity  conjointly  with  the  intensity  of  the  magnetic  force  in 
the  end  of  the  core,  it  is  evident  that  it  will  not  occur  with  the 
maximum  velocity,  which  is  in  the  middle  of  the  to  or  /ro?n 
motion;  nor  at  the  stop  nearest  to  the  dominant  magnet, 
where  the  core  end  has  greatest  magnetic  force,  but  somewhere 
between  the  two.  Nevertheless,  during  the  whole  of  the 
advance,  the  core  will  cause  a  current  in  the  experimental  helix 
in  one  direction,  and  during  the  whole  of  the  recession  it  will 
cause  a  current  in  the  other  direction. 

2666.  If  diamagnetic  bodies,  under  the  influence  of  the  domi- 
nant magnet,  assume  also  a  polar  state,  the  difference  between 


Jan.  1850.] 


Commutator  action  varied. 


147 


them  and  iron  being  only  that  the  poles  of  like  names  or  forces 
are  changed  in  place  (2429.  2430.),  then  the  same  kind  of 
action  as  that  described  for  iron  would  occur  with  them ;  the 
only  difference  being,  that  the  two  currents  produced  would  be 
in  the  reverse  direction  to  those  produced  by  iron. 

2667.  If  a  commutator,  therefore,  were  to  be  arranged  to 
gather  up  these  currents,  either  in  the  one  case  or  the  other,  and 
send  them  on  to  the  galvanometer  in  one  consistent  current,  it 
should  change  at  the  moments  of  the  two  stops  (2665.),  and  then 
would  perform  such  duty  perfectly.  If,  on  the  other  hand,  the 
commutator  should  change  at  the  times  of  maximum  velocity 
or  maximum  intensity,  or  at  two  other  times  equidistant  either 
from  the  one  stop-  or  from  the  other,  then  the  parts  of  the 
opposite  currents  intercepted  between  the  changes  would  exactly 
neutralize  each  other,  and  no  final  current  would  be  sent  on  to 
the  galvanometer. 

2668.  Now  the  action  of  the  iron  is,  by  experiment,  of  this 
natui'e.  If  an  iron  wire  be  simply  introduced  or  taken  out  of 
the  experimental  helix  with  different  conditions  of  the  commu- 
tator, the  results  are  exactly  those  which  have  been  stated.  If 
the  machine  be  worked  with  an  iron  wire  core,  the  commutator 
changing  at  the  stops  (2665.),  then  the  current  gathered  up  and 
sent  on  to  the  galvanometer  is  a  maximum  ;  if  the  commutator 
change  at  the  moments  of  maximum  velocity,  or  at  any  other 
pair  of  moments  equidistant  from  the  one  stop  or  the  other, 
then  the  current  at  the  commutator  is  a  minimum,  or  0. 

2669.  There  are  two  or  three  precautions  which  are  necessary 
to  the  production  of  a  pure  result  of  this  kind.  In  the  first 
place,  the  iron  ought  to  be  soft  and  not  previously  in  a  magnetic 
state.  In  the  next,  an  effect  of  the  following  kind  has  to  be 
guarded  against.  If  the  iron  core  be  away  from  the  dominant 
magnet  at  the  beginning  of  an  experiment,  then,  on  working 
the  machine,  the  galvanometer  will  be  seen  to  move  in  one 
direction  for  a  few  moments,  and  afterwards,  notwithstanding 
the  continued  action  of  the  machine,  will  return  and  gradually 
take  up  its  place  at  0°.  If  the  iron  core  be  at  its  shortest 
distance  from  the  dominant  magnet  at  the  beginning  of  the  ex- 
periment, then  the  galvanometer  needle  will  move  in  the  contrary 
direction  to  that  which  it  took  before,  but  will  again  settle  at 
0°.    These  effects  are  due  to  the  circumstance,  that,  when  the 


148  Supposed  diamagneiic  polarity .       [Series  XXIII. 


iron  is  away  from  the  dominant  magnet,  it  is  not  in  so  strong 
a  magnetic  state,  and  when  at  the  nearest  to  it  is  in  a  stronger 
state,  than  the  mean  or  average  state,  which  it  acquires  during 
the  continuance  of  an  experiment ;  and  that  in  rising  or  falUng 
to  this  average  state,  it  produces  two  currents  in  contrary 
directions,  which  are  made  manifest  in  the  experiments  de- 
scribed. These  existing  only  for  the  first  moments,  do,  in  their 
effects  at  the  galvanometer,  then  appear,  producing  a  vibration 
which  gradually  passes  away. 

2670.  One  other  precaution  I  ought  to  specify.  Unless  the 
commutator  changes  accurately  at  the  given  points  of  the 
journey,  a  little  effect  is  gathered  up  at  each  change,  and  may  give 
a  permanent  deflection  of  the  needle  in  one  direction  or  the 
other.  The  tongues  of  my  commutator,  being  at  right  angles 
to  the  direction  of  motion  and  somewhat  flexible,  dragged  a 
little  in  the  to  and  from  parts  of  the  journey  :  in  doing  this 
they  approximated,  though  only  in  a  small  degree,  to  that  which 
is  the  best  condition  of  the  commutator  for  gathering  up  (and 
not  opposing)  the  currents ;  and  a  deflection  to  the  right  or  left 
appeared  (2677.).  Upon  discovering  the  cause  and  stiffening 
the  tongues  so  as  to  prevent  their  flexure,  the  effect  disappeared, 
and  the  iron  was  perfectly  inactive. 

2671.  Such  therefore  are  the  results  with  an  iron  core,  and 
such  would  be  the  effects  with  a  copper  or  bismuth  core  if  they 
acted  by  a  diamagnetic  polarity.  Let  us  now  consider  what  the 
consequences  would  be  if  a  copper  or  bismuth  core  were  to  act 
by  currents,  induced  for  the  time,  in  its  moving  mass,  and  of 
the  nature  of  those  suspected  (2642.).  If  the  copper  cyHnder 
moved  with  uniform  velocity  (2665.),  then  currents  would  exist 
in  it,  parallel  to  its  circumference,  during  the  whole  time  of  its 
motion  ;  and  these  would  be  at  their  maximum  force  just  before 
and  just  after  the  to  or  inner  stop,  for  then  the  copper  would  be 
in  the  most  intense  parts  of  the  magnetic  field.  The  rising 
current  of  the  copper  core  for  the  in  portion  of  the  journey 
would  produce  a  current  in  one  direction  in  the  experimental 
hehx,  the  stopping  of  the  copper  and  consequent  falling  of  its 
current  would  produce  in  the  experimental  hehx  a  current  con- 
trary to  the  former ;  the  first  instant  of  motion  outwards  in  the 
core  would  produce  a  maximum  current  in  it  contrary  to  its 
former  current,  and  producing  in  the  experimental  helix  its  in- 


Jan.  1850.] 


Analysis  of  the  actions. 


149 


ductive  result,  being  a  current  the  same  as  the  last  there  pro- 
duced ;  and  then,  as  the  core  reti'eated,  its  current  would  fall,  and 
in  so  doing  and  by  its  final  stop,  would  produce  a  fourth  current 
in  the  experimental  helix,  in  the  same  direction  as  the  first. 

2672.  The  four  currents  produced  in  the  experimental  helix 
alternate  by  twos,  i.  e.  those  produced  by  the  falling  of  the  first 
current  in  the  core  and  the  rising  of  the  second  and  contrary 
current,  are  in  one  direction.  They  occur  at  the  instant  before 
and  after  the  stop  at  the  magnet,  i.  e.  from  the  moment  of  maxi- 
mum current  (in  the  core)  before,  to  the  moment  of  maximum 
current  after,  the  stop ;  and  if  that  stop  is  momentary,  they 
exist  only  for  that  moment,  and  should  during  that  brief  time 
be  gathered  up  by  the  commutator.  Those  produced  in  the 
experimental  helix  during  the  falling  of  the  second  current  in 
the  core  and  the  rising  of  a  third  current  (identical  with  the 
first)  in  the  return  of  the  core  to  the  magnet,  are  also  the  same 
in  direction,  and  continue  from  the  beginning  of  the  retreat  to 
the  end  of  the  advance  (or  fi-om  maximum  to  maximum)  of  the 
core  currents,  i.  e.  for  almost  the  whole  of  the  core  journey; 
and  these,  by  its  change  at  the  maximum  moments,  the  com- 
mutator should  take  up  and  send  on  to  the  galvanometer. 

2673.  The  motion  however  of  the  core  is.  not  uniform  in 
velocity,  and  so,  sudden  in  its  change  of  direction,  but,  as  before 
said  (2665.),  is  at  a  maximum  as  respects  velocity  in  the  middle 
of  its  approach  to  and  retreat  from  the  dominant  magnet ;  and 
hence  a  very  important  advantage.  For  its  stop  may  be  said  to 
commence  immediately  after  the  occurrence  of  the  maximum 
velocity ;  and  if  the  lines  of  magnetic  force  were  equal  in  position 
and  power  there  to  what  they  are  nearer  to  the  magnet,  the 
contrary  currents  in  the  experimental  heUx  would  commence  at 
those  points  of  the  journey  ;  but,  as  the  core  is  entering  into  a 
more  intense  part  of  the  field,  the  current  in  it  still  rises  though 
the  velocity  diminishes,  and  the  consequence  is,  that  the  maxi- 
mum current  in  it  neither  occurs  at  the  place  of  greatest  velocity, 
nor  of  greatest  force,  but  at  a  point  between  the  two.  This  is 
true  both  as  regards  the  approach  and  the  recession  of  the  core, 
the  two  maxima  of  the  currents  occurring  at  points  equidistant 
from  the  place  of  rest  near  the  dominant  magnet. 

2674.  It  is  therefore  at  these  two  points  that  the  commutator 
should  change,  if  adjusted  to  produce  the  greatest  eftect  at  the 


150  Supposed  diamagnetic polarity.       [Series  XXIII. 

galvanometer  by  the  currents  excited  in  the  experimental  helix, 
through  the  influence  of,  or  in  connexion  with,  currents  of 
induction  produced  in  the  core ;  and  experiment  fully  justifies 
this  conclusion.  If  the  length  of  the  journey  from  the  stop  out 
to  the  stop  in,  which  is  2  inches  (2643.  2644.),  be  divided  into 
100  parts,  and  the  dominant  magnet  be  supposed  to  be  on  the 
right-hand,  then  such  an  expression  as  the  following,  50|50, 
may  represent  the  place  where  the  commutator  changes,  which 
in  this  illustration  would  be  midway  in  the  to  and  from  motion, 
or  at  the  places  of  greatest  velocity. 

2675.  Upon  trial  of  various  adjustments  of  the  commutat 

I  have  found  that  from  77j23  to  88|12,  gave  the  best  result  with 
a  copper  core.  On  the  whole,  and  after  many  experiments,  I 
conclude  that  with  the  given  strength  of  electro-magnet,  distance 
of  the  experimental  core  when  at  the  nearest  from  the  magnet, 
'ength  of  the  whole  journey,  and  average  velocity  of  the  machine, 
86 1 14  may  represent  the  points  where  the  induced  currents  in 
^he  core  are  at  a  maximum  and  where  the  commutator  ought  to 
change. 

2676.  From  what  has  been  said  before  (2667-),  it  will  be  seen 
that  both  in  theory  and  experiment  these  are  the  points  in  which 
the  effect  of  any  polarity,  magnetic  or  diamagnetic,  would  be 
absolutely  nothing.  Hence  the  power  of  submitting  by  this 
machine  metals  and  other  bodies  to  experiment,  and  of  elimina- 
ting the  effects  of  magnetic  polarity,  of  diamagnetic  polarity, 
and  of  inductive  action,  the  one  from  the  others :  for  either  by 
the  commutator  or  by  the  direction  of  the  polarity,  they  can  be 
separated ;  and  further,  they  can  also  be  combined  in  various 
ways  for  the  purpose  of  elucidating  their  joint  and  separate 
action. 

2677.  For  let  the  ar-  ^  ^ 
rows  in  the  diagram  re-  """-.^  ; 
present  the  to  and  from  r\  ..  '^ 


iourney,  and  the  inter-  „    /  i        ^v.        ,  t>^j^ 

sections  of  the  lines  a,  b 


or  c,  dy  &c.  the  periods   -,j=-- — — f]  ■^7rt- 

in  the  journey  when  the  ^'    k  Ti 

commutator  changes  (in 

which  case  c,  d  Mill  correspond  to  50|50,  and  e,  /  to  86|14), 
then  a.  h  will  represent  the  condition  of  the  commutator  for  the 


Jan.  1850.]  Analysis  of  the  actions.  151 

maximum  effect  of  iron  or  any  other  polar  body.  If  the  Une 
a,  b  be  gradually  revolved  until  parallel  to  c,  d,  it  will  in  every 
position  indicate  points  of  commutator  change,  which  M  ill  give 
the  iron  effect  at  the  galvanometer  by  a  deflection  of  the  needle 
always  in  the  same  direction ;  it  is  only  when  the  ends  a  and  b 
have  passed  the  points  c  and  c?,  either  above  or  below,  that  the 
direction  of  the  deflection  will  change  for  iron.  But  the  line  a, 
b  indicates  those  points  for  the  commutator  with  which  no 
effect  will  be  produced  on  the  galvanometer  by  the  induction  of 
currents  in  the  mass  of  the  core.  If  the  line  be  incUned  in  one 
direction,  as  i,  k,  then  these  currents  will  produce  a  deflection 
at  the  galvanometer  on  one  side ;  if  it  be  inclined  in  the  other 
direction,  as  /,  m,  then  the  deflection  will  be  on  the  other  side. 
Therefore  the  effects  of  these  induced  currents  may  be  either 
combined  with,  or  opposed  to,  the  effects  of  a  polarity,  whether 
it  be  magnetic  or  diamagnetic. 

2678.  All  the  metals  before  mentioned  (2655.),  namely,  gold, 
silver,  copper,  tin,  lead,  platina,  antimony  and  bismuth,  were 
submitted  to  the  power  of  the  electro-magnet  under  the  best 
adjustment  (2675.)  of  the  commutator.  The  effects  were 
stronger  than  before,  being  now  at  a  maximum,  but  in  the  same 
order;  as  regai'ded  antimony  and  bismuth,  they  were  very 
small,  amounting  to  not  more  than  half  a  degree,  and  may  very 
probably  have  been  due  to  a  remainder  of  irregular  action  in 
some  part  of  the  apparatus.  All  the  experiments  with  the 
divided  cores  (2658,  &c.)  were  repeated  with  the  same  results  as 
before.  Phosphorus,  sulphur  and  gutta  percha  did  not,  either 
in  this  or  in  the  former  state  of  the  commutator,  give  any  indi- 
cation of  effect  at  the  galvanometer. 

2679.  As  an  illustration  of  the  manner  in  which  this  position 
of  the  commutator  caused  a  separation  of  the  effects  of  copper 
and  iron,  I  had  prepared  a  copper  cylinder  core  2  inches  in 
length  having  an  iron  wire  in  its  axis,  and  this  being  employed 
in  the  apparatus  gave  the  pure  effect  of  the  copper  with  its 
induced  currents.  Yet  this  core,  as  a  whole,  was  highly  mag- 
netic to  an  ordinary  test-needle  ;  and  when  the  two  changes  of 
the  commutator  were  not  equidistant  from  the  one  stop  or  the 
other  (2670.  2677')j  ^^^"^  effect  came  out  powerfully,  over- 
ruling the  former  and  producing  very  strong  contrary  deflections 
at  the  needle.    The  platinum  core  which  1  have  used  is  an  im- 


152  Supposed  diamaffneiic poIa7'ity.       [Series  XXIII. 

perfect  cylinder,  2  inches  long  and  0-62  of  an  inch  thick :  it 
points  magnetically  between  the  poles  of  a  horseshoe  electro- 
magnet (2381.),  making  a  vibration  in  less  than  a  second,  but 
with  the  above  condition  of  the  commutator  (2675.)  gives  4°  of 
deflection  due  to  the  induced  currents,  the  magnetic  effect  being 
annulled  or  thrown  out. 

2680.  Some  of  the  combined  effects  produced  by  oblique 
position  of  the  commutator  points  were  worked  out  in  confirm- 
ation of  the  former  conclusions  (2677-) •  When  the  commutator 
was  so  adjusted  as  to  combine  any  polar  power  which  the  bis- 
muth, as  a  diamagnetic  body,  might  possess,  with  any  conducting 
power  which  would  permit  the  formation  of  currents  by  induc- 
tion in  its  mass  (2676.),  still  the  effects  were  so  minute  and 
uncertain  as  to  oblige  me  to  say  that,  experimentally,  it  is  with- 
out either  polar  or  inductive  action. 

2681.  There  is  another  distinction  which  may  usefully  be 
established  between  the  effects  of  a  true  sustainable  polarity,  either 
magnetic  or  diamagnetic,  and  those  of  the  transient  induced 
currents  dependent  upon  time.  If  we  consider  the  resistance  in 
the  circuit,  which  includes  the  experimental  hehxand  the  galva- 
nometer coil,  as  nothing,  then  a  magnetic  pole  of  constant 
strength  passed  a  certain  distance  into  the  helix,  would  produce 
the  same  amount  of  current  electricity  in  it,  whether  the  pole 
were  moved  into  its  place  by  a  quick  or  a  slow  motion.  Or  if 
the  iron  core  be  used  (2668.)  the  same  result  is  produced,  pro- 
vided, in  any  alternating  action,  the  core  is  left  long  enough  at 
the  extremities  of  its  journey  to  acquire,  either  in  its  quick  or 
slow  alternation,  the  same  state.  This  I  found  to  be  the  fact 
when  no  commutator  nor  dominant  magnet  was  used ;  a  single 
insertion  of  a  weak  magnetic  pole  gave  the  same  deflection, 
whether  introduced  quickly  or  slowly;  and  when  the  residual 
dominant  magnet,  an  iron  wire  core,  and  the  commutator  in  its 
position  a,  b  (2677.)  were  used,  four  journeys  to  and  from  pro- 
duced the  same  effect  at  the  galvanometer  when  the  velocities 
were  as  1 :  5  or  even  as  1  :  10. 

2682.  When  a  copper,  silver,  or  gold  core  is  employed  in 
place  of  the  iron,  the  effect  is  very  different.  There  is  no  reason 
to  doubt,  that,  as  regards  the  core  itself,  the  same  amount  of 
electricity  is  thrown  into  the  form  of  induced  circulating  cur- 
rents within  it,  by  a  journey  to  or  from,  whether  that  journey 


Jan.  1850.]  Effects  of  time— revulsion.  153 

is  performed  quickly  or  slowly:  the  above  experiment  (2681.) 
in  fact  confirms  such  a  conclusion.  But  the  effect  which  is 
produced  upon  the  experimental  heHx  is  not  proportionate  to 
the  whole  amount  of  these  currents,  but  to  the  maximum 
intensities  to  which  they  rise.  When  the  core  moves  slowly, 
this  intensity  is  small ;  when  it  moves  rapidly,  it  is  great,  and 
necessarily  so,  for  the  same  current  of  electricity  has  to  travel 
in  the  two  differing  periods  of  time  occupied  by  the  journeys. 
Hence  the  quickly  moving  core  should  produce  a  far  higher 
effect  on  the  experimental  helix  than  the  slowly  moving  core ; 
and  this  also  I  found  to  be  the  fact. 

2683.  The  short  copper  core  was  adjusted  to  the  apparatus, 
and  the  machine  worked  with  its  average  velocity  until  forty 
journeys  to  and  from  had  been  completed ;  the  galvanometer 
needle  passed  39°  west.  Then  the  machine  was  worked  with  a 
greater  rapidity,  also  for  forty  journeys,  and  the  needle  passed 
through  80°  or  more  west ;  finally,  being  worked  at  a  slow  rate 
for  the  same  number  of  journeys,  the  needle  went  through  only 
21°  west.  The  extreme  velocities  in  this  experiment  were  pro- 
bably as  1:6;  the  time  in  the  longest  case  was  considerably 
less  than  that  of  one  vibration  of  the  needle  (2651.),  so  that  I 
believe  all  the  force  in  the  slowest  case  was  collected.  The 
needle  is  very  little  influenced  by  the  swing  or  momentum  of  its 
parts,  because  of  the  deadening  effect  of  the  copper  plate 
beneath  it,  and,  except  to  return  to  zero,  moves  very  little  after 
the  motion  of  the  apparatus  ceases.  A  silver  core  produced  the 
same  results. 

2684.  These  effects  of  induced  currents  have  a  relation  to  the 
phsenomena  of  revulsion  which  I  formerly  described  (2310. 
2315.  2338.),  being  the  same  in  their  exciting  cause  and  prin- 
ciples of  action,  and  so  the  two  sets  of  phaenomena  confirm  and 
illustrate  each  other.  That  the  revulsive  phcenomena  are  pro- 
duced by  induced  currents,  has  been  shown  before  (2327.  2329. 
2336.  2339.) ;  the  only  difference  is,  that  with  them  the  induced 
currents  were  produced  by  exalting  the  force  of  a  magnet  placed 
at  a  fixed  distance  from  the  affected  metal ;  whilst  in  the  present 
phaenomena,  the  force  of  the  magnet  does  not  change,  but  its 
distance  from  the  piece  of  metal  does. 

2685.  So  also  the  same  circumstances  M'hich  affect  the  phae- 
nomena here  affect  the  revulsive  phaenomena.    A  plate  of 


154  hiductive  curi'ents — revulsion.        [Series  XXIII. 

metal  will,  a8  a  whole,  be  \v ell-rev ulsed  ;  but  if  it  be  divided 
across  the  course  of  the  induced  currents  it  is  not  then  affected 
(2529.).  A  ring  helix  of  copper  wire,  if  the  extremities  be  un- 
connected, will  not  exhibit  the  pheenomena,  but  if  they  be  con- 
nected then  it  presents  them  (2660.). 

2686.  On  the  whole,  the  revulsive  phaenomena  are  a  far 
better  test  and  indication  of  these  currents  than  the  present 
effects  ;  especially  if  advantage  be  taken  of  the  division  of  the 
mass  into  plates,  so  as  to  be  analogous,  or  rather  superior,  in 
their  action  to  the  disc  cylinder  cores  (2659.  2661.).  Platinum, 
palladium  and  lead  in  leaf  or  foil,  if  cut  or  folded  into  squares 
half  an  inch  in  the  side,  and  then  packed  regularly  together,  will 
show  the  phaenomena  of  revulsion  very  well ;  and  that  according 
to  the  direction  of  the  leaves,  and  not  of  the  external  form. 
Gold,  silver,  tin  and  copper  have  the  revulsive  effects  thus 
greatly  exalted.  Antimony,  as  I  have  already  shown,  exhibits 
the  effect  well  (2514.  2519.).  Both  it  and  bismuth  can  be  made 
to  give  evidence  of  the  induced  currents  produced  in  them  when 
they  are  used  in  thin  plates,  either  single  or  associated,  although, 
to  avoid  the  influence  of  the  diamagnetic  force,  a  little  attention 
is  required  to  the  moments  of  making  and  breaking  contact 
between  the  voltaic  battery  and  the  electro-magnet. 

2687.  Copper,  when  thus  divided  into  plates,  had  its  revulsive 
phsenomena  raised  to  a  degree  that  I  had  not  before  observed. 
A  piece  of  copper  foil  was  annealed  and  tarnished  by  heat,  and 
then  folded  up  into  a  small  square  block,  half  an  inch  in  the 
side  and  a  quarter  of  an  inch  thick,  containing  seventy-two  folds 
of  the  metal.  This  block  was  suspended  by  a  silk  film  as  before 
(2248.),  and  whilst  at  an  angle  of  30°  or  thereabouts  with  the 
equatorial  line  (2252.),  the  electro-magnet  was  excited ;  it  imme- 
diately advanced  or  turned  until  the  angle  was  about  45°  or  50°, 
and  then  stood  still.  Upon  the  interruption  of  the  electric  current 
at  the  magnet  the  revulsion  came  on  very  strongly,  and  the  block 
turned  back  again,  passed  the  equatorial  line,  and  proceeded  on 
until  it  formed  an  angle  of  50°  or  60°  on  the  other  side;  but 
instead  of  continuing  to  revolve  in  that  direction  as  before 
(2315.),  it  then  returned  on  its  course,  again  passed  the  equa- 
torial line,  and  almost  reached  the  axial  position  before  it  stood 
still.  In  fact,  as  a  mass,  it  vibrated  to  and  fro  about  the  equa- 
torial line. 


Jan.  1850.]       Revulsion— diamagnetic  polarity. 


155 


2688.  This  however  is  a  simple  result  of  the  principles  of 
action  formerly  developed  (2329.  2336.).  The  revulsion  is  due 
to  the  production  of  induced  currents  in  the  suspended  mass 
during  the  falling  of  the  magnetism  of  the  electro-magnet;  and 
the  effect  of  the  action  is  to  bring  the  axis  of  these  induced 
currents  parallel  to  the  axis  of  force  in  the  magnetic  field.  Con- 
sequently, if  the  time  of  the  fall  of  magnetic  force,  and  therefore 
of  the  currents  dependent  thereon,  be  greater  than  the  time 
occupied  by  the  revulsion  of  the  copper  block  as  far  as  the  equa- 
torial line,  any  further  motion  of  it  by  momentum  will  be  coun- 
teracted by  a  contrary  force ;  and  if  this  force  be  strong  enough 
the  block  will  return.  The  conducting  power  of  the  copper  and 
its  division  into  laminae,  tend  to  set  up  these  currents  very 
readily  and  with  extra  power ;  and  the  very  power  which  they 
possess  tends  to  make  the  time  of  a  vibration  so  short,  that  two 
or  even  three  vibrations  can  occur  before  the  force  of  the  electro- 
magnet has  ceased  to  fall  any  further.  The  effect  of  time,  both 
in  the  rising  and  falling  of  power,  has  been  referred  to  on  many 
former  occasions  (2170.  2650.),  and  is  very  beautifully  seen  here. 


2689.  Returning  to  the  subject  of  the  assumed  polarity  of 
bismuth,  I  may  and  ought  to  refer  to  an  experiment  made  by 
Reich,  and  described  by  Weber',  which,  if  I  understand  the 
instruction  aright,  is  as  follows :  a  strong  horseshoe  magnet  is 
laid  upon  a  table  in  such  a  position  that  the  line  joining  its  two 
poles  is  perpendicular  to  the  magnetic  meridian  and  to  be  con- 
sidered as  prolonged  on  one  side;  in  that  line,  and  near  the 
magnet,  is  to  be  placed  a  small  powerful  magnetic  needle,  sus- 
pended by  cocoon  silk,  and  on  the  other  side  of  it,  the  pole  of  a 
bar  magnet,  in  such  a  position  and  so  near,  as  exactly  to  coun- 
teract the  effect  of  the  horseshoe  magnet,  and  leave  the  needle 
to  point  exactly  as  if  both  magnets  were  away.  Then  a  mass  of 
bismuth  being  placed  between  the  poles  of  the  horseshoe  magnet 
is  said  to  react  upon  the  small  magnet  needle,  causing  its  de- 
flection in  a  particular  direction,  and  this  is  supposed  to  indi- 
cate the  polarity  of  the  bismuth  under  the  circumstances,  as  it 
has  no  such  action  when  the  magnets  are  away.    A  piece  of 

*  Taylor's  Scientific  Memoirs^  v.  p.  480. 


156  Supposed  diamagnetic  polarity.        [Series  XXIII. 

iron  in  place  of  the  bismuth  produces  the  contrary  deflection  of 
the  needle. 

2690.  I  have  repeated  this  experiment  most  anxiously  and 
carefully,  but  have  never  obtained  the  slightest  trace  of  action 
with  the  bismuth.  I  have  obtained  action  with  the  iron ;  but 
in  those  cases  the  action  was  far  less  than  if  the  iron  were  applied 
outside  between  the  horseshoe  magnet  and  the  needle,  or  to  the 
needle  alone,  the  magnets  being  entirely  away.  On  using  a 
garnet,  or  a  weak  magnetic  substance  of  any  kind,  I  cannot  find 
that  the  arrangement  is  at  all  comparable  for  readiness  of  indi- 
cation or  delicacy,  with  the  use  of  a  common  or  an  astatic  needle, 
and  therefore  1  do  not  understand  how  it  could  become  a  test 
of  the  polarity  of  bismuth  when  these  fail  to  show  it.  Still  I 
may  have  made  some  mistake ;  but  neither  by  close  reference 
to  the  description,  nor  to  the  principles  of  polar  action,  can  I 
discover  where. 

2691.  There  is  an  experiment  which  Pliicker  described  to  me, 
and  which  at  first  seems  to  indicate  strongly  the  polarity  of 
bismuth.  If  a  bar  of  bismuth  (or  phosphorus)  be  suspended 
horizontally  between  the  poles  of  the  electro-magnet,  it  will  go 
to  the  equatorial  position  with  a  certain  force,  passing,  as  I  have 
said,  from  stronger  to  Weaker  places  of  action  (2267.).  If  a  bar 
of  iron  of  the  same  size  be  fixed  in  the  equatorial  position  a  little 
below  the  plain  in  which  the  diamagnetic  bar  is  moving,  the 
latter  will  proceed  to  the  equatorial  position  with  much  greater 
force  than  before,  and  this  is  considered  as  due  to  the  circum- 
stance, that,  on  the  side  where  the  iron  has  N  polarity,  the  dia- 
magnetic body  has  S  polarity,  and  that  on  the  other  side  the 
S  polarity  of  the  iron  and  the  N  polarity  of  the  bismuth  also 
coincide. 

2692.  It  is  however  very  evident  that  the  lines  of  magnetic 
force  have  been  altered  sufficiently  in  their  intensity  of  direction, 
by  the  presence  of  the  iron,  to  account  fully  for  the  increased 
effect.  For,  consider  the  bar  as  just  leaving  the  axial  position 
and  going  to  the  equatorial  position ;  at  the  moment  of  starting 
its  extremities  are  in  places  of  stronger  magnetic  force  than 
before,  for  it  cannot  be  doubted  for  a  moment  that  the  iron  bar 
determines  more  force  from  pole  to  pole  of  the  electro-magnet 
than  if  it  were  away.  On  the  other  hand,  when  it  has  attained 
the  equatorial  position,  the  extremities  are  under  a  much  weaker 


Jan.  1850.]       Results  of  Pliicker,  Reich,  ^c.  J 57 

magnetic  force  than  they  were  subject  to  in  the  same  places 
before;  for  the  iron  bar  determines  downwards  upon  itself  much 
of  that  force,  which,  when  it  is  not  there,  exists  in  the  plane 
occupied  by  the  bismuth.  Hence,  in  passing  through  90°,  the 
diamagnetic  is  urged  by  a  much  greater  difference  of  intensity 
of  force  when  the  iron  is  present  than  when  it  is  away ;  and 
hence,  probably,  the  whole  additional  result.  The  eflfect  is  like 
many  others  which  I  have  referred  to  in  magnecrystaUic  action 
(2487-2497.),  and  does  not,  I  think,  add  anything  to  the  experi- 
mental proof  of  diamagnetic  polarity. 

2693.  Finally,  1  am  obliged  to  say  that  I  can  find  no  experi- 
mental evidence  to  support  the  hypothetical  view  of  diamagnetic 
polarity  (2640.),  either  in  my  own  experiments,  or  in  the  repeti- 
tion of  those  of  Weber,  Reich,  or  others.  I  do  not  say  that  such 
a  polarity  does  not  exist;  and  I  should  think  it  possible  that 
Weber,  by  far  more  delicate  apparatus  than  mine,  had  obtained 
a  trace  of  it,  were  it  not  that  then  also  he  would  have  certainly 
met  with  the  far  more  powerful  effects  produced  by  copper, 
gold,  silver,  and  the  better  conducting  diamagnetics.  If  bis- 
muth should  be  found  to  give  any  eflfect,  it  must  be  checked 
and  distinguished  by  reference  to  the  position  of  the  commu- 
tator, division  of  the  mass  by  pulverization,  influence  of  time, 
&c.  It  appears  to  me  also,  that,  as  the  magnetic  polarity  con- 
ferred by  iron  or  nickel  in  very  small  quantity,  and  in  unfavour- 
able states,  is  far  more  readily  indicated  by  its  effect  on  an 
astatic  needle,  or  by  pointing  between  the  poles  of  a  strong 
horseshoe  magnet,  than  by  any  such  arrangement  as  mine  or 
Weber's  or  Reich's,  so  diamagnetic  polarity  would  be  much 
more  easily  distinguished  in  the  same  way,  and  that  no  indica- 
tion of  that  polarity  has  as  yet  reached  to  the  force  and  value  of 
those  already  given  by  Brugmann  and  myself. 

2694.  So,  at  present,  the  actions  represented  or  typified  by 
iron,  by  copper  and  by  bismuth,  remain  distinct ;  and  their 
relations  are  only  in  part  made  known  to  us.  It  cannot  be 
doubted  that  a  larger  and  simpler  law  of  action  than  any  we  are 
yet  acquainted  with,  will  hereafter  be  discovered,  which  shall 
include  all  these  actions  at  once ;  and  the  beauty  of  Weber's 
suggestion  in  this  respect  was  the  chief  inducement  to  me  to 
endeavour  to  establish  it. 

2695.  Though  from  the  considerations  above  expressed  (2693.) 


158  Supposed  diamagnetic polarity.       [Series  XXIII, 

I  had  little  hopes  of  any  useful  results,  yet  I  thought  it  right  to 
submit  certain  magnecrystallic  cores  to  the  action  of  the  appa- 
ratus. One  core  was  a  large  group  of  symmetrically  disposed 
crystals  of  bismuth  (2457-);  another  a  very  large  crystal  of  red 
ferroprussiate  of  potassa ;  a  third  a  crystal  of  calcareous  spar ; 
and  a  fourth  and  fifth  large  crystals  of  protosulphate  of  iron. 
These  were  formed  into  cylinders  of  which  the  first  and  fourth 
had  the  magnecrystallic  axes  (2479.)  parallel  to  the  axis  of  the 
cylinder,  and  the  second,  third  and  fifth,  had  the  equatorial 
direction  of  force  (2594.  2595.  2546.)  parallel  to  the  axis  of  the 
cylinder.  None  of  them  gave  any  effect  at  the  galvanometer, 
except  the  fourth  and  fifth,  and  these  were  alike  in  their  results, 
and  were  dependent  for  them  on  their  ordinary  magnetic  pro- 
perty. 

2696.  Some  of  the  expressions  I  have  used  may  seem  to 
imply,  that,  when  employing  the  copper  and  other  cores,  I 
imagine  that  currents  are  first  induced  in  them  by  the  dominant 
masnet,  and  that  these  induce  the  currents  which  are  observed 
in  the  experimental  helix.  Whether  the  cores  act  directly  on 
the  experimental  helix  or  indirectly  through  their  influence  on 
•the  dominant  magnet,  is  a  very  interesting  question,  and  I  have 
found  it  difficult  to  select  expressions,  though  I  wished  to  do 
■so,  which  should  not  in  some  degree  prejudge  that  question.  It 
seems  to  me  probable,  that  the  cores  act  indirectly  on  the  helix, 
and  that  their  immediate  action  is  altogether  directed  towards  the 
dominant  magnet,  which,  whether  they  consist  of  magnetic  or 
diamagnetic  metals,  raises  them  into  power  either  permanently 
or  transiently,  and  has  their  power  for  that  time  directed  towards 
it.  Before  the  core  moves  to  approach  the  magnet,  the  magnet 
and  experimental  helix  are  in  close  relation ;  and  the  latter  is 
situated  in  the  intense  field  of  magnetic  force  which  belongs  to 
the  pole  of  the  former.  If  the  core  be  iron,  as  it  approaches  the 
magnet  it  causes  a  strong  convergence  and  concentration  of  the 
lines  of  magnetic  force  upon  itself;  and  these,  as  they  so  con- 
verge, passing  through  the  helix  and  across  its  convolutions,  are 
competent  to  produce  the  currents  in  it  which  are  obtained 
(2653.  2668.).  As  the  iron  retreats  these  fines  of  force  diverge, 
and  again  crossing  the  line  of  the  wire  in  the  helix  in  a  contrary 
direction  to  their  former  course,  produce  a  contrary  current.  It 
does  not  seem  necessary,  in  viewing  the  action  of  the  iron  core. 


Jan.  1850.]       Nature  of  the  inductive  actions. 


159 


to  suppose  any  direct  action  of  it  on  the  helix,  or  any  other 
action  than  this  which  it  exerts  upon  the  lines  of  force  of  the 
magnet.  In  such  a  case  its  action  upon  the  helix  would  be 
indirect. 

2697.  Then,  by  all  parity  of  reasoning,  when  a  copper  core 
enters  the  helix  its  action  upon  it  should  be  indirect  also.  For 
the  currents  which  are  produced  in  it  are  caused  by  the  direct 
influence  of  the  magnet,  and  must  react  equivalently  upon  it. 
This  they  do,  and  because  of  their  direction  and  known  action, 
they  will  cause  the  lines  of  force  of  the  magnet  to  diverge.  As 
the  core  diminishes  in  its  velocity  of  motion,  or  comes  to  rest, 
the  currents  in  it  will  cease,  and  then  the  lines  of  force  will  con- 
verge ;  and  this  divergence  and  convergence,  or  passage  in  two 
directions  across  the  wire  of  the  experimental  helix,  is  suflicient 
to  produce  the  two  currents  which  are  obtained  in  the  advance 
of  the  core  towards  the  dominant  magnet  (2671.  2673.).  A  cor- 
responding effect  in  the  contrary  direction  is  produced  by  the 
retreat  of  the  core. 

2698.  On  the  idea  that  the  actions  of  the  core  were  not  of  this 
kind,  but  more  directly  upon  the  helix,  I  interposed  substances 
between  the  core  and  the  helix  during  the  times  of  the  exjieri- 
ment.  A  thick  copper  cylinder  2*2  inches  long,  0'7  of  an  inch 
external  diameter,  and  0"1  of  an  inch  internal  diameter,  and  con- 
sequently 0*3  of  an  inch  thick  in  the  aides,  was  placed  in  the 
experimental  helix,  and  an  iron  wire  core  (2668.)  used  in  the 
apparatus.  Still,  whatever  the  form  of  the  experiment,  the  kind 
and  amount  of  effect  produced  were  the  same  as  if  the  copper 
were  away,  and  either  glass  or  air  in  its  place.  When  the 
dominant  magnet  was  removed  and  the  wire  core  made  a  magnet, 
the  same  results  were  produced. 

2699.  Another  copper  lining,  being  a  cylinder  2*5  inches 
long,  1  inch  in  external  diameter,  and  one-eighth  of  an  inch  in 
thickness,  was  placed  in  the  experimental  helix,  and  cores  of 
silver  and  copper  five-eighths  of  an  inch  in  thickness,  employed 
as  befpre,  with  the  best  condition  of  the  commutator  (2675.)  : 
the  effects,  with  and  without  the  copper,  or  with  and  without 
the  glass,  were  absolutely  the  same  (2698.). 

2700.  There  can  be  no  doubt  that  the  copper  linings,  when 
in  place,  were  full  of  currents  at  the  time  of  action,  and  that 
when  away  no  such  currents  would  exist  in  the  air  or  glass 


160  Supposed  diamagnetic  polarity.       [Series  XXIII. 

replacing  them.  There  is  also  full  reason  to  admit,  that  the 
divergence  and  convergence  of  the  magnetic  lines  of  force 
supposed  above  (2G97.)  would  satisfactorily  account  for  such 
currents  in  them,  supposing  the  indirect  action  of  the  cores 
were  assumed.  If  that  supposition  be  rejected,  then  it  seems 
to  me  that  the  whole  of  the  bodies  present,  the  magnet,  the 
helix,  the  core,  the  copper  lining,  or  the  air  or  glass  which  re- 
places it,  must  all  be  in  a  state  of  tension,  each  part  acting  on 
every  other  part,  being  in  what  I  have  occasionally  elsewhere 
imagined  as  the  electro-tonic  state  (1729.). 

2/01.  The  advance  of  the  copper  makes  the  lines  of  magnetic 
force  diverge,  or,  so  to  say,  drives  them  before  it  (2697.).  No 
doubt  there  is  reaction  upon  the  advancing  copper,  and  the  pro- 
duction of  currents  in  it  in  such  a  direction  as  makes  them 
competent,  if  continued,  to  continue  the  divergence.  But  it 
does  not  seem  logical  to  say,  that  the  currents  which  the  lines 
of  force  cause  in  the  copper,  are  the  cause  of  the  divergence  of 
the  lines  of  force.  It  seems  to  me,  rather,  that  the  lines  of  force 
are,  so  to  say,  diverged,  or  bent -outM'ard  by  the  advancing 
copper  (or  by  a  connected  wire  moving  across  lines  of  force  in 
any  other  form  of  the  experiments),  and  that  the  reaction  of 
the  lines  of  force  upon  the  forces  in  the  particles  of  the  copper 
cause  them  to  be  resolved  into  a  current,  by  which  the  resistance 
is  discharged  and  removed,  and  the  line  of  force  returns  to  its 
place.  I  attach  no  other  meaning  to  the  words  line  of  force 
than  that  which  I  have  given  on  a  former  occasion  (2149.). 


Royal  Institution, 
14  Dec.  1849. 


161 


TWENTY-FOURTH  SERIES 

§  30.  On  the  possible  relation  of  Gravity  to  Electricity. 
Received  August  1, — Read  November  28,  1850, 

2702.  The  long  and  constant  persuasion  that  all  the  forces 
of  nature  are  mutually  dependent,  having  one  common  origin, 
or  rather  being  different  manifestations  of  one  fundamental 
power  (2146.),  has  made  me  often  think  upon  the  possibility 
of  establishing,  by  experiment,  a  connexion  between  gravity 
and  electricity,  and  so  introducing  the  former  into  the  .group, 
the  chain  of  which,  including  also  magnetism,  chemical  force  and 
heat,  binds  so  many  and  such  varied  exhibitions  of  force  together 
by  common  relations.  Though  the  researches  1  have  made 
with  this  object  in  view  have  produced  only  negative  results, 
yet  I  think  a  short  statement  of  the  matter,  as  it  has  presented 
itself  to  my  mind,  and  of  the  result  of  the  experiments,  which 
offering  at  first  much  to  encourage,  were  only  reduced  to  their 
-true  value  by  most  careful  searchings  after  sources  of  error,  may 
be  useful,  both  as  a  general  statement  of  the  problem,  and  as 
awakening  the  minds  of  others  to  its  consideration. 

2703.  In  seai'ching  for  some  principle  on  which  an  experi- 
mental inquiry  after  the  identification  or  relation  of  the  two 
forces  could  be  founded,  it  seemed  that  if  such  a  relation  existed, 
there  must  be  something  in  gravity  which  would  correspond  to 
the  dual  or  antithetical  nature  of  the  forms  of  force  in  electricity 
and  magnetism.  To  my  mind  it  appeared  possible  that  the 
ceding  to  the  force  or  the  approach  of  gravitating  bodies  on  the 
one  hand,  and  the  effectual  reversion  of  the  force  or  separation  • 
of  the  bodies  on  the  other,  might  present  the  points  of  corre- 
spondence ;  quiescence  (as  to  motion)  being  the  neutral  condition. 
The  final  unchangeabihty  of  gravity  did  not  seem  affected  by 
such  an  assumption  ;  for  the  acting  bodies  when  at  rest  would 
ever  have  the  same  relation  to  each  other,  and  it  would  only  be 

'  Philosophical  Transactions,  1851,  p.  I.    The  Bakerian  Lecture. 
VOL.  III.  ^ 


162  Relation  of  gravity  to  electricity.    [Series  XXIV. 

at  the  times  of  motion  to  and  fro  that  any  results  related  to 
electricity  could  be  expected.  Such  results,  if  possible,  could 
only  be  exceedingly  small ;  but,  if  possible ,  i.  e.  if  true,  no  terms 
could  exaggerate  the  value  of  the  relation  they  would  establish. 

2704.  The  thought  on  which  the  experiments  were  founded 
was,  that,  as  two  bodies  moved  towards  each  other  by  the  force 
of  gravity,  currents  of  electricity  might  be  developed  either  in 
them  or  in  the  surrounding  matter  in  one  direction  ;  and  that 
as  they  were  by  extra  force  moved  from  each  other  against  the 
power  of  gravitation,  the  opposite  currents  might  be  produced. 
Also,  that  these  currents  would  have  relation  to  the  line  of  ap- 
proach and  recession,  and  not  to  space  generally,  so  that  two 
bodies  approaching  would  have  currents  in  the  opposite  direction 
as  to  space  generally,  but  the  same  as  to  the  direction  of  their 
motion  along  the  line  joining  them.  It  will  be  unnecessary  to  go 
further  into  the  suppositions  which  arose  concerning  these  points, 
or  regarding  the  effect  of  forced  motions  either  coinciding  with, 
or  across  the  direction  of  the  earth's  gravitation,  and  many 
other  matters,  than  to  say  that,  as  the  effect  looked  for  was  ex- 
ceedingly small,  so  no  hope  was  entertained  of  any  result  except 
by  means  of  the  gravitation  of  the  earth.  The  earth  was  there- 
fore made  to  be  the  one  body,  and  the  indicating  mass  of  matter 
to  be  experimented  with  the  other. 

2705.  First  of  all,  a  body,  which  was  to  be  allowed  to  fall, 
was  surrounded  by  a  helix,  and  then  its  effect  in  falling  sought 
for.  Now  a  body  may  either  fall  with  a  helix  or  through  a 
helix.  Covered  copper  wire,  to  the  amount  of  350  feet  in  length, 
was  made  into  a  hollow  cylindrical  helix,  about  4  inches  long, 
its  internal  diameter  being  1  inch  and  its  external  diameter  2 
inches.  It  was  attached  to  a  line  running  upon  an  easy  pulley, 
so  that  it  could  be  raised  36  feet,  and  then  allowed  to  fall  with 
an  accelerated  velocity  on  to  a  very  soft  cushion,  its  axis  remain- 
ing vertical  the  whole  time.  Long  covered  wires  were  made 
fast  to  its  two  extremities,  and  these  being  twisted  round  each 
other,  were  attached  to  a  very  delicate  galvanometer,  placed 
about  50  feet  aside  from  the  line  of  fall,  and  on  a  level  midway 
with  its  course.  The  accuracy  of  the  connexion  and  the  direc- 
tion of  the  set  of  the  needle,  were  then  both  ascertained  by  the  , 
introduction  of  a  feeble  thermo-electric  combination  into  the 
current.    Such  a  helix,  either  in  rising  or  falling,  can  produce 


1 


Aug.  1S50.]      Relation  of  gravity  to  electricity. 


163 


no  deviation  at  the  galvanometer  by  any  current  due  to  the  mag- 
netism of  the  earth ;  for  as  it  remains  parallel  to  itself  during 
the  fall,  so  the  lines  of  equal  magnetic  force,  which  being  parallel 
to  the  dip,  are  intersected  by  the  wii-e  convolutions  of  the  descend- 
ing helix,  are  cut  with  an  equal  velocity  on  both  sides  of  the 
helix,  and  consequently  no  effect  of  magneto-electric  induction 
is  produced.  Neither  in  rising  nor  in  falling  did  this  helix  pre- 
sent any  trace  of  action  at  the  galvanometer  whether  the  con- 
nexion with  the  galvanometer  was  continued  the  whole  time,  or 
whether  it  Avas  cut  off  just  before  the  diminution  or  cessation  of 
motion  either  way,  or  whether  the  rising  and  the  falling  were  made 
to  occur  isochronously  with  the  times  of  vibration  of  the  galva- 
nometer needle.  So,  though  no  effect  of  gravity  appeared  in 
the  helix  itself,  still  no  source  of  error  appeared  to  arise  in  this 
mode  of  using  it. 

2 706.  A  solid  cylinder  of  copper,  three-fourths  of  an  inch  in 
diameter  and  7  inches  in  length,  was  now  introduced  into  the 
helix  and  cai-efully  fastened  in  it,  being  bound  round  with  a  cloth 
so  as  not  to  move,  and  this  compound  arrangement  was  allowed 
to  fall  as  before  {2705,).  It  gave  very  minute  but  remarkably 
regular  indications  of  a  current  at  the  galvanometer;  and  the 
probability  of  these  being  related  to  gravity  appeared  the  greater, 
when  it  was  found  that  on  raising  the  helix  or  core,  similar  in- 
dications of  contrary  currents  appeared.  It  was  some  time  be- 
fore I  was  able  to  refer  these  currents  to  their  true  cause,  but  at 
last  I  traced  them  to  the  action  of  a  part  of  the  connecting 
wires  proceeding  from  the  helix  to  the  galvanometer.  The  two 
wires  had  been  regularly  twisted  together,  but  the  effect  of 
many  falls  had  opened  a  part  near  the  middle  distance  into  a 
sort  of  loop,  so  that  the  wires,  instead  of  being  tightly  twisted 
together  like  the  strands  of  a  rope,  were  separate  for  3  feet,  as 
if  the  strands  were  open.  In  falling,  this  loop  opened  out  more 
or  less,  but  always  in  the  same  manner ;  and  the  consequence 
was  that  the  part  of  it  representing  the  transverse  opening,  which 
was  furthest  from  the  galvanometer,  travelled  over  a  larger 
space  than  the  corresponding  part  nearest  the  galvanometer. 
Now  had  they  travelled  through  equal  spaces,  the  effect  of  the 
magnetic  lines  of  force  of  the  earth  upon  them  would  have  been 
equal,  and  no  effect  at  the  galvanometer  would  have  been  pro- 
duced ;  as  it  was,  currents  in  opposite  directions,  but  of  unequal 

M  2 


164  Relation  of  gravity  to  electricity,    [Series  XXIV. 

amounts  of  force^  tended  to  be  produced,  and  a  current  equal  to 
the  difference  actually  appeared.  Such  a  case  is  described  in 
my  earliest  researches  on  terrestrial  magno-electro  induction 
(171.)'  It  is  evident  that  the  current  should  appear  in  the  re- 
verse direction,  as  the  helix  and  wires  are  raised  in  the  air,  and 
thus  arose  the  reverse  effect  described  above.  Therefore  no 
positive  or  favourable  evidence  was  supplied  in  favour  of  the 
original  assumption  by  this  use  of  a  copper  core  in  the  helix. 

2707.  The  copper  was  selected  as  a  heavy  body  and  an  ex- 
cellent conductor  of  electricity.  On  its  dismissal,  a  bismuth 
cylinder  of  equal  size  was  employed  to  replace  it  as  a  substance 
eminently  diamagnetic,  and  a  bad  conductor  amongst  metals. 
Uncertain  evidence  arose ;  but  by  close  attention,  first  to  one 
point  and  then  to  another,  all  the  indications  disappeared,  and 
then  the  rising  or  falhng  of  the  bismuth  produced  no  effect  on 
the  galvanometer. 

2708.  An  iron  cylinder  was  also  employed  as  a  magnetic  metal, 
but  when  made  perfectly  secure,  so  as  to  prevent  any  motion 
relative  to  the  helix,  it  was  equally  indifferent  with  the  copper 
and  bismuth  (2706.  2707.). 

2709.  Cylinders  of  glass  and  shell-lac  were  employed  as 
non-conducting  substances,  but  without  effect. 

2710.  In  other  experiments  the  helix  was  fixed,  and  the  dif- 
ferent substances  in  the  form  of  cylinders,  three-fourths  of  an 
inch  in  diameter  and  24  inches  long,  were  dropped  through  it, 
or  else  raised  through  it  with  an  accelerated  velocity ;  but  in 
neither  case  was  any  effect  produced.  Rods  of  copper,  bismuth, 
glass,  shell-lac  and  sulphur  were  employed.  Occasionally  these 
rods  were  made  to  rotate  rapidly  before  and  during  their  fall ; 
and  many  other  conditions  were  devised  and  carried  into  effect, 
but  always  with  negative  results,  when  sources  of  error  were 
avoided  or  accounted  for. 

2711.  On  further  consideration  of  the  original  assumption, 
namely,  a  relation  between  the  forces,  and  of  the  effects  that 
might  be  looked  for  consequent  upon  a  condition  of  tension  in 
and  around  the  particles  of  the  body,  which,  as  we  know,  are  at 
the  same  moment  the  residence  of  both  gravitating  and  electric 
forces,  and  are  subject  to  the  gravitation  of  the  earth,  it  seemed 
probable  that  the  stopping  of  the  up  and  down  motion  (2703. 
2704.)  in  the  line  of  gravity  would  produce  contrary  effects  to 


Aug.  1850.]      Relation  of  gravity  to  electricity. 


165 


the  coming  on  of  the  motion,  and  that,  whether  the  stopping 
was  sudden  or  gradual ;  also  that  a  motion  downward  quicker 
than  that  which  gravity  could  communicate,  would  give  more 
effect  than  the  gravity  result  by  itself,  and  that  a  corresponding 
increase  in  the  velocity  upwards  would  be  proportionally  effectual. 
In  such  case  a  machine  which  could  give  a  rapid  alternating  up 
and  down  motion,  might  be  very  useful  in  producing  many 
minute  units  of  inductive  action  in  a  small  space  and  moderate 
time ;  for  then,  by  proper  commutators,  the  accelerated  and  re- 
tarded parts  of  each  half-vibration  could  be  separated  and  re- 
combined  into  one  consistent  current,  and  this  current  could  be 
sent  through  the  galvanometer  during  the  time  its  needle  was 
swinging  in  one  direction,  and  afterwards  reversed  for  the  time 
of  a  swing  in  the  other  direction ;  and  so  on  alternately  until  the 
effect  had  become  sensible,  if  any  were  produced  by  the  as- 
sumed cause. 


2712.  The  machine  which  I  had  made  for  this  purpose  is  that 
■  described  in  the  last  Series  of  these  Researches  (2643.),  the  elec- 
I  tro-magnet,  the  experimental  core  and  the  rod  which  carried  them 
being  removed :— a,  b,  c  frame-board ;  d,d,d  wooden  lever,  of 
•  which  e  is  the  axis  ;  /  the  crank-wheel^  and  g  the  great  wheel 


L 


166  Relation  of  gravity  to  electricity.     [Series  XXIV. 

with  its  handle  h;  i  the  bar  connecting  the  crank-wheel  and 
lever;  q  the  galvanometer;  r  the  commutator;  w,  connecting 
wires ;  s,  s  springs  of  brass  or  copper ;  t  a  copper  rod  connect- 
ing the  two  arras  of  the  lever  to  give  strength  ;  u  the  hollow 
helix  fixed,  or  moveable  at  pleasure.  The  plan  is  to  a  scale  of 
one-fifteenth.  Being  on  a  moveable  frame,  it  could  be  placed  in 
any  position.  The  cylinder  of  metal  or  other  substance  to  be 
submitted  to  its  action,  was  5|  inches  long  and  three-fourths  of 
an  inch  in  diameter,  and  M'as  firmly  held  between  the  ends  d,  d 
of  the  lever  arms.  The  extent  of  the  alternating  motion  was  3 
inches.  A  hollow  cylindrical  helix  u,  2|  inches  in  length,  and 
of  such  internal  diameter  that  the  cylinders  could  complete  their 
rapid  journeys  to  and  fro  within  it  without  any  danger  of  stri- 
king against  its  sides,  was  constructed,  containing  516  feet  of 
covered  copper  M-ire  ;  this  cylinder  could  be  either  fixed  immove- 
ably  or  attached  firmly  to  the  cylinder  under  experiment  so  as 
to  move  with  it.  The  wires  from  this  helix  passed  to  the  com- 
mutators and  from  them  to  the  galvanometer.  Part  of  the  mo- 
mentum of  this  machine  was  taken  up  by  springs  s,  s  (2648.), 
and  converted  into  the  contrary  motion  ;  but  so  much  remained 
undisposed  of  thus,  that  great  care  was  required  in  fixing  and 
strutting  to  render  the  action  of  the  whole  very  steady,  or  else 
derangement  quickly  occurred  at  the  cylinder  and  helix,  and 
electro-currents  were  frequently  produced. 

2713.  The  employment  of  cylinders  of  iron,  copper  and  other 
substances  in  this  machine,  was  competent  to  produce  electro- 
currents  in  various  ways.  Thus,  iron  might  produce  magneto- 
electric  currents  consequent  upon  its  polar  condition  under  the 
influence  of  the  earth  ;  these  it  would  be  easy  to  detect  and 
separate  by  the  use  of  adjusted  magnets,  which  should  neutralize 
dr  reverse  the  lines  of  magnetic  force  passing  through  the  iron. 
Currents  like  those  induced  in  copper  cylinders  and  good  con- 
ductors (2663.  2684.),  might  be  produced  by  the  earth's  action  ; 
but  as  the  lines  of  gravitating  force  and  of  terrestrial  magnetic 
force  are  inclined  to  each  other,  these  might  be  separated  by 
position ;  and  it  appeared  that  there  was  no  source  of  error  that 
might  not  by  care  be  eliminated.  I  will  not  occupy  time  by 
describing  how  this  long  lesson  of  care  was  learned,  but  pass 
at  once  to  the  chief  results. 

2714.  The  copper  cyHnder  (2712.)  was  placed  in  the  machine, 


Aug.  1850.]      Relation  of  gravity  to  electricity.  167 

and  the  helix  fixed  immoveably  around  it,  the  whole  being  in 
such  a  position  that  the  cylinder  should  be  vertical,  and  move 
up  and  down  parallel  to  the  line  of  gravitating  force  within  the 
helix.  However  rapidly  the  machine  was  worked,  or  whatever 
the  position  of  the  commutator,  there  was  no  result  at  the  gal- 
vanometer. Cylinders  of  bismuth,  glass,  sulphur,  gutta  percha, 
&c.,  were  also  employed,  but  with  the  same  negative  conclusion. 

2715.  Then  the  helix  was  taken  from  its  fixed  support  and 
fastened  on  to  the  copper  cylmder  so  as  to  move  with  it,  and 
now  very  regular  and  comparatively  large  effects  were  produced. 
After  a  while,  however,  these  were  traced  to  causes  other  than 
gravity,  and  of  the  following  kind.    The  helix  was  fixed  at  one 
end  of  a  lever,  at  a  point  22  inches  from  its  axis,  and  being  2 
inches  in  diameter  its  wires  on  one  side  were  only  21  inches,  and 
on  the  other  side  23  inches  from  this  axis.    Hence,  in  vibra- 
ting these  parts  travelled  with  velocities  and  through  spaces 
which  are  as  21 :  23.    When  therefore  their  paths  were  across 
the  Hnes  of  magnetic  force  of  the  earth,  electro-currents  tended 
to  form  in  these  different  parts  proportionate  in  amount  or 
strength  to  these  numbers ;  and  the  differences  of  these  currents 
being  continually  gathered  up  by  the  commutators,  were  made 
sensible  at  the  galvanometer.    This  was  rendered  manifest  by 
placing  the  machine  so,  that  though  the  plane  of  vibration  was 
still  vertical,  the  place  of  the  helix  was  just  under  the  centre  of 
motion,  and  the  central  line  of  the  helix  therefox'e,  instead  of 
being  vertical,  was  horizontal.    Now  the  convolutions  of  the 
helix  cut  the  lines  of  magnetic  force  in  the  most  favourable 
manner ;  and  the  consequence  was  that  the  commutators  were 
not  required,  for  a  single  motion  of  the  helix  in  one  direction 
was  sufficient  to  show  at  the  galvanometer  the  magneto-electric 
currents  induced.    If,  on  the  contrary,  the  plane  of  motion  was 
made  horizontal,  then  no  current  was  produced  hy  any  amount 
of  motion ;  for  though  the  helix  was  as  horizontal  as,  and  not 
sensibly  more  so  than  before,  yet  the  parts  of  the  convolutions 
which  intersected  the  magnetic  lines  of  force  (being  the  upper 
and  the  lower  parts)  now  moved  with  exactly  equal  velocity,  and 
no  differential  result  was  produced. 

27I6.  The  former  small  result  (2715.)  was  therefore  probably 
dependent  upon  an  effect  of  this  kind  ;  and  this  was  confirmed 
by  placing  the  machine  in  such  a  position  that  the  axis  of  the 


168  Relation  of  gravity  to  electricity.    [Series  XXIV 

moving  copper  cylinder  and  helix  should  in  its  medium  position 
be  parallel  to  the  line  of  the  dip,  and  then  no  effect  was  pro- 
duced. Other  bodies  in  the  same  position  were  equally  unable 
to  produce  any  effect. 

2717.  Here  end  my  trials  for  the  present.  The  results  are  ne- 
gative. They  do  not  shake  my  strong  feeling  of  the  existence 
of  a  relation  between  gravity  and  electricity,  though  they  give 
no  proof  that  such  a  relation  exists. 


Royal  Institution, 
July  19,  1850. 


169 


TWENTY-FIFTH  SERIES  ^ 

§  31.  On  the  magnetic  and  diamagnetic  condition  of  bodies. 
^  i.  Non-expansion  of  gaseous  bodies  by  magnetic  force.  H  ii. 
Differential  magnetic  action.  1[  iii.  Magnetic  characters  of 
Oxygen^  Nitrogen  and  Space. 

Received  August  15, — Read  November  28,  1850. 

1  i.  Non-expansion  of  gaseous  bodies  by  magnetic  force. 

27I8.  There  can.  be  no  doubt  that  the  magnetic  force,  the  dia- 
magnetic force,  and  the  magneoptic  or  magnecrystalHc  force, 
will,  when  thoroughly  understood,  be  found  to  unite  or  exist 
under  one  form  of  power,  and  be  essentially  the  same.  Hence 
the  great  interest  which  exists  in  the  development  of  any  one 
of  these  modes  of  action  ;  for  differing  so  greatly  as  they  do  in 
very  peculiar  points,  it  is  hardly  possible  that  any  one  of  them 
should  be  advanced  in  its  illustration  or  comprehension,  without 
a  corresponding  advance  in  the  knowledge  of  the  others.  Stimu- 
lated by  such  a  feeling,  I  have  been  engaged  with  Pliicker,  Weber, 
Reich  and  others,  in  endeavouring  to  make  out,  with  some  de- 
gree of  precision,  the  mode  of  action  of  diamagnetic  as  well  as 
magnecrystallic  bodies ;  and  the  recent  investigation  (2640,  &c.) 
and  endeavour  to  confirm  the  idea  of  polarity  in  bismuth  and 
diamagnetic  bodies,  the  reverse  of  that  in  a  magnet  or  in  iron 
bodies,  was  one  of  the  results  of  that  conviction  and  desire. 

2719.  Having  failed  however  to  establish  the  existence  of 
such  an  antipolarity,  and  having  shown,  as  I  think,  that  the 
phaenomena  which  were  supposed  to  be  due  to  it  are  in  fact 
dependent  upon  other  conditions  and  causes,  I  was  induced,  in 
the  search  after  something  precise  as  to  the  nature  of  diamag- 
netic bodies,  to  examine  another  idea  wliich  had  arisen  in  con- 
sequence of  the  development  of  magnetic  and  diamagnetic  phae- 
nomena amongst  gaseous  substances :  this  thought,  with  some 
of  the  results  which  have  grown  out  of  it  during  its  experimental 
examination,  I  purpose  making  the  subject  of  the  present  paper. 

'  Philosophical  Transactions,  1851.  p.  7. 


L 


170      Non-expansion  of  gases  by  magnetism.    [Series  XXV. 


2720.  Bancalari  first  showed  that  flame  was  diamagnetic^ 
The  effect,  as  I  proved,  was  due  chiefly  to  the  heated  state  of 
gaseous  portions  of  the  flame^ ;  but  besides  that,  it  appeared  that 
at  common  temperatures  diamagnetic  phaenomena  could  be  ex- 
hibited by  gases ;  and  also  that  in  their  production  the  gases 
differed  very  much  one  from  another''' ;  so  that,  taking  common  air, 
for  instance,  as  a  standard,  nitrogen,  and  many  other  gases,  were 
strongly  diamagnetic  in  relation  to  it,  whilst  oxygen  took  on  the  ap- 
pearance of  a  magnetic  body ;  for  they  were  repelled  from,  while 
it  was  attracted  to,  the  place  of  maximum  force  in  the  magnetic 
field. 

2721.  Recalling  the  general  law  given  respecting  the  action 
of  magnetic  and  diamagnetic  bodies  (22fi7.  2418.),  namely,  that 
the  former  tended  to  go  from  weaker  to  stronger  places,  and  the 
latter  from  stronger  to  weaker  places  of  magnetic  power,  and 
applying  it  to  such  bodies  as  the  gases,  which  are  at  the  same 
time  both  highly  elastic  and  easily  changed  in  bulk  by  the  super- 
addition  of  very  small  degrees  of  force,  it  would  seem  to  follow, 
that  if  the  particles  of  a  diamagnetic  gas  tended  to  go  from 
strong  to  M'eak  places  of  action,  in  consequence  of  the  direct  and 
immediate  effect  of  the  magnetic  power  on  them,  then  such  a 
gas  should  tend  to  become  enlarged  or  expanded  in  the  mag- 
netic field.    For,  the  amount  of  power  by  which  the  particles 
would  tend  to  recede  from  the  axis  of  the  magnetic  field,  would 
be  added  to  the  expansive  force  by  which  they  before  resisted 
the  pressure  of  the  atmosphere  ;  that  pressure  would  therefore 
be  in  part  sustained  by  the  new  force,  and  expansion  would  of 
necessity  be  the  result.    On  the  other  hand,  if  a  gas  were  mag- 
netic (as  for  instance  oxygen),  then  the  force  cast  upon  the  par- 
ticles, by  such  a  direct  and  immediate  action  of  the  magnetic 
power  upon  them,  would  urge  them  towards  the  axis  of  the  mag- 
netic field,  and  so  coinciding  with,  and  being  superadded  to  the 
pressure  of  the  atmosphere,  would  tend  to  cause  contraction 
and  diminution  of  bulk. 

2722.  If  such  supposititious  cases  w-ere  to  prove  true,  we 
should  then  be  able  to  arrive  at  the  knowledge  of  the  real  zero- 
point  (2416.  2432.  2440.) ^  not  amongst  gases  only,  but  amongst 

1  Philosophical  Magazine,  1847,  vol.  xxxi.  pp.  401,  421. 

2  Ibid,  pp.  404,  406.  Ibid.  p.  409.  "  Ibid.  p.  420. 


Aug.  1850,]    Non-expansion  of  gases  by  magnelism. 


171 


all  bodies,  and  should  be  able  to  tell  whether  such  a  gas  as 
oxygen  were  a  magnetic  or  a  diamagnetic  body,  and  also  able  to 
range  individual  gases  and  other  substances  in  their  proper 
places.  And  though  I  had  originally  endeavoured  to  ascertain 
whether  there  was  any  change  in  the  bulk  of  air  in  the  magnetic 
field,  and  found  none,  still  Plucker's  statement  that  he  had  ob- 
tained such  an  effect*,  and  the  great  enlargement  of  knowledge 
respecting  the  gases  which  since  then  we  have  acquired  relating 
to  their  diamagnetic  relations,  and  especially  of  the  great  differ- 
ence which  exists  between  them,  encouraged  me  to  proceed. 


2723,  I  first  endeavoured  to  determine  M'hether  there  was  any 
affection  of  the  layer  of  air  (or  other  gas)  immediately  in  contact 
with  the  magnetic  pole,  which,  either  by  the  consequent  expan- 
sion or  contraction  of  that  layer,  could  render  it  able  to  affect 
the  course  of  a  ray  of  light  and  thus  make  manifest  the  changes 
occurring  within.  A  metal  screen,  with  a  pin-hole  in  it,  was  set 
up  before  the  flame  of  a  bright  lamp  in  a  dark  room,  and  thus 
an  artificial  star  or  small  definite  luminous  object  was  formed. 
Forty-six  feet  from  it  was  placed  the  great  horseshoe  magnet 
(2247.),  ready  to  be  excited  by  twenty  pairs  of  Grove's  plates; 
the  poles  were  in  a  line,  so  that  the  ray  from  the  lamp  passed 
for  4  inches  close  to  the  surface  of  the  first  pole,  then  through 
6  inches  of  air,  and  then,  for  4  inches,  close  to  the  surface  of 
the  second  pole.    A  very  fine  refracting  telescope,  belonging  to 

•  Sir  James  South,  having  an  aperture  of  3  inches  and  46  inches 
focal  length,  received  the  ray.  The  telescope  was  furnished 
with  a  perfect  micrometer,  so  that  the  smallest  change  in  the 
place  of  the  luminous  image  could  be  observed  on  the  threads. 
The  axis  of  the  telescope  was  just  above  the  level  of  the  mag- 
netic poles.  Not  the  smallest  change  in  either  the  character  or 
place  of  the  luminous  image  could  be  observed,  either  on  the 
making  or  the  breaking  of  the  contact  between  the  voltaic  bat- 
tery and  the  magnetic  wire. 

2724.  As  the  chief  part  of  the  light  which  came  to  the  tele- 
scope consisted  of  rays  which  passed  at  some  distance  above  the 
magnetic  poles,  these  were  cut  off  by  a  screen,  which  rising  only 
one-eighth  of  an  inch  above  the  level  of  the  poles,  allowed  no  ray 

'  Annales  de  Chimie,  1850,  vol.  xxix.  p.  134. 


172       Non-expansion  of  gases  by  magnetism.    [Series  XXV. 

to  pass  that  was  not  within  that  distance.  The  intensity  of  the 
hght  was  of  course  diminished,  and  the  image  was  distorted  by 
inflection ;  still  its  place  was  well  marked  by  the  micrometer. 
Not  the  slightest  change  in  that  or  any  other  character  occurred 
in  the  supervention  or  the  withdrawal  of  the  magnetic  force. 

2725.  The  terminals  of  the  magnetic  poles  were  then  varied, 
so  that  the  ray  sometimes  passed  parallel  and  close  to  a  long 
right-angled  edge,  or  parallel  to  and  between  two  right-angled 
edges,  a  little  above  or  below  them,  or  over  the  line  joining 
two  hemispherical  poles,  placed  close  together  (and  also  in  many 
other  ways),  but  in  no  case  did  the  magnetic  action  produce  any 
effect  upon  the  course  of  the  ray. 

2726.  In  another  form  of  the  experiment  the  telescope  was 
dismissed,  and  a  simple  card,  with  a  pin-hole  -^th  or  y^th 
of  an  inch  in  diameter,  employed  in  its  place.  The  image  of 
the  star  of  light  could  be  seen  through  the  pin-hole  in  the  dark 
room,  and  yet  every  ray  tending  to  its  formation  passed  within 
/gth  of  an  inch  of  the  surface  of  the  magnetic  pole ;  still  no 
effect  due  to  the  magnetic  force  could  be  observed. 

2727.  By  another  arrangement  of  the  polar  terminations, 
analogous  to  one  I  had  formerly  employed  when  experimenting 
on  the  diamagnetic  relations  of  the  gases  ^  I  was  able  to  sur- 
round them  with  other  gaseous  substances  than  air,  and  subject 
the  ray  for  2  inches  of  its  course  to  these  gases  whilst  under  the 
influence  of  the  magnet.  Though  the  glass  of  the  enclosing 
vessel  disturbed  the  image  of  the  object,  i.  e.  the  point  of  light, 
yet  it  was  easy  to  perceive  that  no  additional  effect  occurred 
when  the  magnetism  was  superinduced. 

2728.  Oxygen,  nitrogen,  hydrogen  and  coal-gas  were  thus 
employed;  but  whether  any  one  of  these,  or  whether  air  itself 
was  submitted  to  examination,  when  in  contact  with  the  active 
pole  of  a  very  powerful  magnet,  it  did  not  appear  to  be  either 
expanded  or  condensed  to  such  a  degree  as  to  cause  any  sensible 
change  in  its  refractive  force. 

2729.  In  order  to  compare  the  expected  result  with  the  real 
result  due  to  change  of  volume,  I  took  a  bar  of  iron  7  inches 
long  and  placed  it  so  that  the  ray  from  the  luminous  object  m 
passing  to  the  eye  should  proceed  by  the  side  of  the  bar  at  not 
more  than  j\t^  of  an  inch  from  it,  and  then  raised  the  tempera- 

1  Philosophical  Magazine,  1847,  vol.  xxxi.  pp.  414,  415. 


Aug.  1850.]    Non-expansion  of  gases  by  magnetism.  173 

ture  of  the  bar  gradually,  until  by  expanding  the  air  in  contact 
with  it,  the  course  of  the  ray  of  light  was  sensibly  affected ;  to 
do  this  it  required  to  be  exalted  many  degrees.  When  the  air 
of  the  place  was  at  60°  and  the  iron  raised  to  100°  Fahr,,  the 
effect  was  not  distinct.  Hence  it  seemed,  that  observation  of  the 
expected  change  of  volume  of  the  air  would  be  rendered  far  more 
sensible  by  some  arrangement,  measuring  that  change  directly, 
than  by  such  means  as  those  referred  to  above,  dependent  on 
refractive  force ;  for  it  is  certain  that  the  change  of  volume,  in  a 
very  small  quantity  of  air,  raised  from  60°  to  100°,  woxild  be 
very  evident  by  the  former  method.  On  the  other  hand,  it  was 
just  possible  that  if  the  air  or  gas  was  affected  by  the  magnet,  it 
might  only  be  in  that  film  immediately  contiguous  to  the  pole ; 
and  also  that  great  differences  in  the  degree  of  change  might 
exist  along  the  edge  of  a  solid  angle,  and  along  the  sides  of  the 
planes  forming  that  angle.  Hence  the  assumed  necessity  for 
examining  those  parts  by  a  ray  of  light ;  and  every  precaution 
was  taken,  by  inclining  the  course  of  the  ray  a  little  more  or  less 
to  the  sides  or  edges  of  the  poles,  and  by  making  the  sides  or 
edges  very  slightly  convex,  to  include  every  variation  of  the  ex- 
periment, that  might  help  to  make  any  magnetic  or  diamagnetic 
effect,  whether  special  or  local,  or  general,  manifest ;  but  with- 
out effect. 


2730.  I  proceeded,  as  these  attempts  had  failed,  to  endeavour 
to  determine  and  compare  the  volume  of  air  subjected  to  the 
magnetic  force,  before  and  after  its  subjection  ;  and  there  seemed 
to  be  the  greater  hope  of  obtaining  some  results  in  this  way, 
provided  any  such  change  was  a  consequence  of  the  action  of 
magnetic  power,  because  air  and  gases,  at  a  considerable  distance 
from  the  surface  of  the  magnet,  are  known  to  be  strongly  affected 
diamagnetically,  and  because  Pliicker  had  already  said  he  had 
obtained  such  change  of  volume  (2722.). 

2731.  The  first  instrument  constructed  for  this  purpose  was 
of  the  following  kind.  Two  blocks  of  soft  iron,  each  1  inch 
thick  and  3  inches  square,  having  filed  and  flattened  surfaces, 
were  prepared ;  and  also  a  sheet  of  copper,  ^\jth  of  an  inch 
in  thickness  and  3  inches  square,  having  its  middle  part  cut 
away  to  within  0*3  of  an  inch  of  the  edge  all  round.  This  plate 
or  frame  was  then  placed  between  the  iron  blocks,  and  the 


174       Non-expansion  of  gases  by  magnetism.    [Series  XXV. 

whole  held  together  very  tightly  by  copper  screws,  so  as  to 
make  an  ah-chamber  g?^th  of  an  inch  wide  and  2-4  inches  square, 
having  the  faces  of  the  blocks,  which  were  to  become  the  mag- 
netic poles,  for  its  sides.    Three  apertures  and  correspondmg 
passages  gave  access  to  the  interior  of  this  chamber ;  small  stop- 
cocks were  attached  to  each.    By  two  of  these,  any  gas,  after 
it  had  been  properly  dried,  could  be  sent  into  the  chamber,  or 
swept  out  of  it,  by  any  other  entering  gas ;  and  to  the  third  was 
attached  a  gauge  (2732.)  for  the  purpose  of  indicating  and  mea- 
suring any  change  of  volume  which  might  occur.    The  edges  of 
the  central  copper  plate  and  the  heads  of  the  countersunk 
screws,  were  touched  with  white  hard  varnish,  and  the  chamber 
thus  rendered  perfectly  tight,  under  every  condition  to  which  it 
had  to  be  subjected  (fig.  1). 

Fig.  1. 


2732  The  gauges  were  formed  of  small  capillary  tubes  from 
1-5  to  3  inchfs  in  length,  the  diameter  in  the  middle  of  their 
length  being  less  than  one-half  of  that  at  either  termmation. 

Fig.  2. 


These  were  fixed  at  one  end  into  a  small  socket,  -1-ch  screwed 
on  to  the  third,  or  gauge-cock  mentioned  above  (2/31.).  A 
minute  portion  spirit,  coloured  by  cochineal,  bemg  put  into 
Textei^al  end  of  this  gauge,  from  a  sUp  of  wood  or  glass,  im- 
mediately advanced  to  the  middle  or  narrowest  part,  forming, 
Ts  It  alwLs  should  do,  a  single  portion  of  fluid.  By  shut  ing 
the  cock,  this  little  cylinder  could  be  easily  retamed  in  its  place 
undisturbed  during  tie  filling  of  the  air-chamber  with  gas,  and 


Aug.  1850.]    Non-expansion  of  gases  by  magnetism,  175 

the  adjustment  of  its  pressure  to  equality  with  that  of  the  atmo- 
sphere. On  shutting  the  other  cocks  and  opening  the  gauge- 
cock,  the  gauge  was  then  ready  to  show  any  change  of  volume 
which  the  supervention  of  the  magnetic  force  might  cause ;  but 
to  give  it  the  highest  degree  of  sensibility,  it  was  necessary 
previously  to  make  the  liquid  cylinder  travel  right  and  left  of 
its  place  of  rest,  that  the  tube  might  be  moistened  on  each  side 
of  the  indicating  fluid ;  an  effect  easily  obtained  by  inclining  the 
chamber  to  and  fro,  the  gravity  of  the  fluid  making  it  pass  one 
way  or  the  other.  But  this  and  many  other  necessary  precau- 
tions as  to  position,  temperature,  &c.,  can  only  be  learned  from 
experience. 

2733.  When  this  box  was  in  its  place,  it  stood  between  the 
poles  of  the  great  electro-magnet,  with  the  plane  of  the  gas- 
chamber  in  the  equatorial  position ;  then  square  blocks  of  soft 
iron,  resting  on  the  magnet  poles,  were  made  to  abut  and  bear 
against  the  sides  of  the  box,  so  that  in  fact  the  inner  faces  of 
the  air-chamber  were  the  virtual  magnetic  poles,  and  being  3 
inches  square  were  only  g^oth  of  an  inch  apart.  Hence,  what- 
ever air  or  gas  was  within  the  chamber,  would  be  subjected  to  a 
very  powerful  magnetic  action,  and  could  have  very  small 
changes  in  its  bulk  measured ;  but  it  is  perhaps  necessary  to 
observe,  that  it  would  be  contained  in  a  field  having  everywhere 
lines  of  equal  magnetic  power  (2463.  2465.). 

2734.  Air  was  introduced  into  the  box,  and  when  all  was 
properly  arranged,  the  place  of  the  indicating  fluid  was  observed 
by  a  microscope.  Then  the  magnet  was  rendered  powerfully 
active,  and  there  appeared  a  very  slight  motion  of  the  fluid,  as 
if  the  air  were  a  little  expanded ;  on  taking  off  the  magnetic 
force  the  fluid  returned  to  its  first  place.  The  same  effect  re- 
curred again  and  again.  The  amount  of  this  change  was  very 
small,  and  there  was  reason  to  refer  it  to  the  pressure  exercised 
by  the  magnet,  when  in  action,  upon  the  sides  of  the  iron  box ; 
for  afterwards,  when  the  box  was  placed  in  a  vice  and  squeezed, 
the  same  motion  in  the  fluid  occurred ;  and  further,  when  the 
square  blocks  of  soft  iron  (2733.)  were  kept  apart  by  an  under 
block  of  wood,  so  as  not  absolutely  to  touch  and  press  the  box, 
the  effect  was  reduced  to  almost  nothing, 

2735.  Oxygen,  nitrogen,  carbonic  acid  and  nitrous  oxide 
gases,  were  then  introduced  successively  into  the  iron  box,  and 
with  exactly  the  same  result  as  with  air.    No  difference  appeared 


176       Non-expansion  of  gases  by  magnetism.    [Series  XXV. 

between  oxygen  and  the  other  gases,  greatly  as  they  differ  in 
magnetic  and  diamagnetic  force  and  relations.  Hydrogen  and 
coal-gas  were  also  subjected  to  experiment;  but  when  these 
gases  were  in  the  box  there  was  a  gradual  recession  of  the  indi- 
cating fluid,  due,. as  I  found,  to  the  absorption  of  the  gases, 
probably  either  by  the  varnish  or  cement  or  cork  used  at  the 
gauge,  or  at  the  joints  of  the  box.  The  delicacy  of  the  gauge 
was  thus  made  manifest ;  but  when  the  effect  was  taken  into 
account,  it  was  found  that  these  gases  were  equally  unaffected 
in  bulk  as  the  other  gases  by  the  magnetic  influence. 

2736.  The  diameter  of  the  gauge,  at  the  place  where  the  fluid 
was  placed,  was  rather  less  than  yi^th  of  an  inch.  An  amount 
of  motion  equal  to  of  an  inch  was  easily  discerned.  Com- 
paring these  numbers  with  the  capacity  of  the  gas-chamber,  it 
would  appear  that  if  the  gas  in  the  latter  had  expanded  or  con- 
tracted to  the  extent  of  part,  the  result  would  have  been 
visible ;  or  any  difference  approaching  to  this  amount,  between 
oxygen'  and  nitrogen  or  the  other  gases,  would  have  become 
sensible,  but  no  such  effects  or  differences  appeared. 

2737.  As  the  establishment  of  either  the  occurrence  or  the 
absence  of  change  of  volume  in  gases,  when  under  the  magnetic  in- 
fluence, appeared  to  me  to  be  of  great  and  almost  equal  importance, 
I  was  led  to  consider  whether,  in  the  experiment  just  described, 
the  circumstance  of  the  gases  having  been  subjected  to  the  mag- 
netic power  in  a  field  of  equal  force  (2733.)  might  not  have  in- 
terfered  with  the  production  of  the  effect  sought  for ;  tor  such  a 
field  is  that  where  the  diamagnetic  phaenomena,  of  solid  and 
liquid  bodies,  occur  in  the  most  unfavourable  manner,  and  where 
indeed  they  almost  entirely  disappear.    I  therefore  constructed 
another  apparatus  so  that  this  condition  was  removed,  and  in 
which,  if  the  particles  of  the  diamagnetic  gas,  by  any  unknown 
disposition  of  the  powers  in  action,  tended  only  to  pass  from 
strong  to  weaker  places  of  force,  and  being  thus  incapable  of 
enlargement  in  the  axial  direction,  would  only  show  that  effect 
equatorially,  the  opportunity  for  their  doing  so  should  be  present- 

2738.  A  cylinder  of  soft  iron  had  the  cen- 
tral parts  removed  in  a  lathe,  until  it  had  as- 
sumed the  form  of  an  hour-glass,  or  that  re- 
presented in  fig.  3,  which  is  to  a  scale  of  one- 
third.  When  placed  between  the  poles  of 
the  magnet  instead  of  the  former  box,  it  was 


Aug.  1850.]  Non-expansion  of  gases. 


177 


expected  that  the  continuation  of  the  iron  throughout  would 
prevent  any  diminution  of  its  length,  from  the  pressure  of  the 
poles  (2734.),  and  that  the  diamagnetic  phaenoraena  would  be 
abundantly  produced  in  the  parts  from  whence  the  iron  had 
been  removed.  The  latter  was  found  to  be  the  fact,  for  flame, 
smoke,  bismuth  and  other  diamagnetic  matter,  when  placed, 
there,  passed  equatorially  very  freely. 

2739.  A  copper  tube,  2*5  inches  long,  made  of  metal  0*1  of 
an  inch  thick,  was  fitted  to  the  iron,  so  that  when  in  its  place 
it  should  occupy  the  position  represented  (fig.  3),  and  could 
easily  be  made  perfectly  gas-tight  by  a  little  soft  cement.  In 
this  way  it  formed  an  annular  air-chamber  round  the  iron,  which, 
when  measured,  was  found  to  have  a  capacity  of  rather  more  than 
2  cubic  inches,  and  included  the  most  intense  part  of  the  mag- 
netic field.  Three  stopcocks  were  fitted  into  this  copper  jacket, 
by  two  of  which  gas  w^as  passed  into  and  out  of  the  chamber, 
and  the  third  was  appropriated  to  the  pressure-gauge  as  before. 
Whilst  naked,  this  apparatus  could  not  be  used,  because  of  its 
ever-varying  temperature,  and  the  consequent  disturbance  and 
ejectment  of  the  fluid  in  the  gauge ;  but  when  clothed  in  three 
thicknesses  of  flannel  its  temperature  was  perfectly  steady ;  and 
by  the  further  use  of  wooden  keys  to  turn  the  cocks  the  ap- 
paratus became  unexceptionable. 

2740.  Before  proceeding  to  employ  this  apparatus  with  dif- 
ferent gases,  and  in  order  to  obtain  some  idea  of  what  might  be 
expected  by  comparing  one  gas  with  another,  I  made  a  prelimi- 
nary experiment,  dependent  on  the  relative  specific  gravities  of 
air  and  hydi'ogen,  of  the  following  nature.  It  is  easy  to  diffuse 
a  trace  of  ammonia  through  the  air  of  a  jar,  by  putting  a  little 
paper  wetted  with  a  strong  solution  into  it^;  and  it  is  equally 
easy  to  send  a  jet  of  hydrogen,  containing  the  smallest  portion 
of  muriatic  acid  gas,  by  a  horizontal  tube  into  the  ammoniated 
air.  When  this  is  done,  the  course  of  the  light  hydrogen  in  the 
heavy  air  is  rendered  very  distinctly  visible ;  and  it  is  seen,  on 
leaving  the  horizontal  tube,  to  turn  at  once  upwards  and  to  as- 
cend rapidly,  becoming  wire-drawn  in  its  course,  in  consequence 
of  its  small  specific  gravity  compared  to  air. 

2741.  Two  hemispherical  iron  pole  terminations,  associated 

with  the  great  magnet,  were  then  placed  in  contact  with  each 

'  Philosophical  Magazine,  1847,  vol.  xxxi.  p.  415. 
VOL.   III.  N 


lyg  Non-expansion  of  gases       [Series  XXV. 

other,  so  that  they  might  be  surrounded  either  by  air  or  oxygen  S 
,?  d  the  jet  of  hydrogen,  dehvering  at  the  rate  of  6  cubic  inches  per 
minute,  was  placed  exactly  beneath  the  axial  Une,  in  the  centre 
of  the  magnetic  field.    When  there  was  no  magnetic  force  em- 
ployed the  hydrogen  rose  vertically,  breaking  against  the  points 
where  the  hemispherical  poles  touched ;  but  when  the  mag- 
netic power  was  on,  the  stream  of  hydrogen  divided  into  two 
parts,  moving  right  and  left,  and  ascended  in  two  streams  at  a 
distance  from  the  point  of  contact.    Now  this  division  took 
place  at  a  certain  distance  below  the  axial  line ;  and  at  that  point, 
notwithstanding  theascensive  power  of  hydrogen  in  air  or  oxygen, 
it  was  constrained  to  go  horizontally  by  the  apparently  repulsive 
power  of  the  magnetic  force,  and  did  not  in  its  further  course 
approach  nearer  to  the  axial  Hne,  but  formed  a  curve  concentric 
with  it,  or  nearly  so,  so  that  the  compound  streams  of  gas 
assumed  exactly  the  shape  of  a  tuning-fork. 

2742.  When  air  occupied  the  magnetic  field,  the  division  of 
the  stream  of  hydrogen  was  0*3  or  0*32  of  an  inch  below  the 
axial  line.    When  oxygen  was  about  the  poles,  then  the  division 
of  the  hydrogen  took  place  as  far  off  as  0-55  of  an  inch  below 
the  axial  line.  Hence  at  these  distances  the  power  which  tended 
to  make  the  hydrogen  pass  from  the  axial  line,  equatorially  in 
the  direction  of  the  radius,  was  equal  to  the  difference  of  the 
specific  gravity  of  hydrogen  compared  with  that  of  air  and  oxy- 
gen respectively.   At  lesser  distances  the  power  would  be  much 
greater;  and  indeed,  if  in  any  experiment  the  hydrogen  was 
delivered  nearer  to  the  axial  fine,  it  was  blown  downwards  and 
away  with  much  force.    Calculating  with  these  data,  and  still 
assuming  that  the  diamagnetic  gases  receded  from  the  axial 
line,  in  consequence  of  the  direct  action  of  the  magnet  and  that 
only,  causing  them  to  pass  from  stronger  to  weaker  places  of 
action,  I  found,  as  I  thought,  reason  to  beheve  that  the  more 
diamagnetic  gases,  occupying  the  space  within  the  copper  box 
(2739.),  might  probably  be  expanded  at  least  g^th  part  of  then- 
volume  by  the  magnetic  force.    Now  the  gauges  that  I  employed 
were  sensible  when  the  fluid  in  them  moved  the  ^^-^th  of  an  inch 
(2736.),  yet  that  space  is  only  the  ,-^,th  part  of  the  capacity  of 
the  chamber,  and  therefore  such  an  expansion  as  that  above 


Philosophical  Magazine,  1847,  vol.  xxxi.  pp.  413,  414. 


Aug.  1850.] 


by  magnetic  action. 


179 


would  have  made  it  move  through  0*4  of  an  inch ;  a  quantity 
abundantly  sufficient  to  render  the  result  sensible  if  the  funda- 
mental assumption  were  correct. 

2743.  Avi'  was  first  submitted  to  the  power  of  the  great  horse- 
shoe magnet,  urged  by  twenty  pairs  of  Grove's  plates  in  this 
apparatus  (2739.).  The  fluid  moved  very  slightly  outwards,  as 
if  a  little  expansion  occurred  on  putting  on  the  magnetic  force, 
and  returned  when  the  force  was  taken  off.  This  small  effect 
was  found  afterwards  to  be  due  to  compression,  occasioned  by 
the  tendency  of  the  magnetic  poles  to  approximate  (2734.). 

2744.  Oxygen  presented  exactly  the  same  appearances  as  com- 
mon air  and  to  the  same  amount,  so  that  no  effect,  due  to  mag- 
netic or  diamagnetic  action,  was  here  evident,  but  only  that  of 
the  compression  observed  in  the  case  of  air  (2743.). 

2745.  Nitrogen  gave  exactly  the  same  results  as  oxygen  and 
air.  Now  nitrogen  is  probably  more  diamagnetic  than  hydro- 
gen, and  should  therefore  have  given  a  striking  contrast  with 
oxygen,  if  any  positive  results  were  to  be  obtained. 

2746.  Carbonic  acid  and  nitrous  oxide  gases  yielded  the  same 
negative  results,  and,  as  1  believe,  when  the  apparatus  was  in  an 
unexceptionable  condition. 

2747.  There  is  at  the  Pharmaceutical  Society  an  excellent 
electro-magnet,  of  the  horseshoe  form,  similar  in  arrangement 
to  our  own  (2247.),  but  far  more  powerful,  and  this  through 
Mr.  Redwood  I  was  favoured  with  the  use  of,  for  the  repetition 
of  the  foregoing  experiments  at  the  house  of  the  Society.  The 
iron,  which  is  very  soft  and  good  in  quality,  is  a  square  bar,  5 
inches  in  thickness,  and  the  medium  line  is  50  inches  in  length. 
It  has  1500  feet  of  copper  wire,  0*175  of  an  inch  in  thickness, 
coiled  round  it,  and  arranged  (when  I  used  it)  in  one  continuous 
length.  The  moveable  terminal  pieces  for  the  poles  are  massive 
in  proportion  to  the  magnet.  Eighty  pairs  of  Grove's  plates 
were  used  to  excite  this  magnet,  and  as  it  was  found,  by  preli- 
minary trials,  that  these  were  most  powerful  when  arranged  as 
four  twenties,  with  their  similar  ends  connected,  they  were  so 
used,  constituting  a  battery  of  twenty  pairs  of  plates,  in  which 
each  platinum  plate  was  4x9  inches  in  the  immersed  part,  and 
therefore  presented  72  square  inches  of  surface  towards  the  active 
zinc. 

2748.  On  repeating  the  former  experiments  (2743.)  the  effect 

N  2 


180 


Non- expansion  of  gases       [Series  XXV. 


of  pressure  was  again  evident,  and  it  was  manifest  that  the  mag- 
net itself,  though  5  inches  in  thickness,  was  a  Kttle  bent  by  the 
mutual  attraction  of  its  poles.  The  effect  was  very  small,  because 
of  the  unity  of  the  iron  core  passing  through  the  oentre  of  the 
experimental  gas-chamber  (2738.).  It  was  the  only  effect  indi- 
cated by  the  gauge,  and  was  the  same  for  all  the  gases ;  and 
when  allowance  was  made  for  it,  nothing  remained  to  indicate 
any  change  in  volume  of  the  gas  itself. 

2749.  Air,  oxygen,  nitrogen,  carbonic  acid  and  nitrous  oxide 
were  submitted,  in  varying  order,  to  the  effect  of  this  very  pow- 
erful magnet,  but  not  the  slightest  trace  of  change  of  bulk  in 
any  of  them  appeared. 

2750.  I  think  that  the  experiments  are  in  every  respect  suffi- 
cient to  decide  that  these  gases,  whether  they  are  considered  as 
magnetic  or  diamagnetic  bodies,  or  whether  they  include  bodies 
of  both  classes  (for  oxygen  is  in  striking  contrast  to  the  rest), 
are  not  affected  in  volume  by  the  magnetic  force,  whether  in 
fields  of  equal  power  (2737-)?  or  in  places  where  the  power  is 
rapidly  diminishing.    I  think  this  decision  very  important  in 
relation  to  the  true  nature  of  the  magnetic  force,  either  as  exist- 
ing in,  or  acting  upon  the  particles  of  bodies ;  and  as  in  the 
magnetic  field  the  force  exhibits  itself,  not  as  a  central  but  as  an 
axial  power,  so  the  further  distinction  of  the  phcenomena,  into 
such  as  are  related  to  the  axial  direction  (2733.),  and  such  as 
are  related  to  or  include  the  equatorial  direction  (2737-),  is  not 
unimportant,  for  they  show  that  the  particles  do  not  tend  to 
separate  either  parallel  to  the  lines  of  magnetic  power,  or  in  a  di- 
rection perpendicular  to  these  hnes.    Without  the  experiments, 
the  mind  might  have  considered  it  very  possible  that  one  of  these 
modes  of  expansion  might  have  occurred  and  not  the  other..'  ^ 

2751.  No  doubt  it  is  true,  that  even  yet  changes  in  volume  in 
these  directions  may  occur,  provided  the  change  in  one  dirfection 
is  expansion  and  in  the  other  contraction,  and  that  these  are  in 
amount  equal  to  each  other.  It  was  partly  in  reference  to  such 
possible  changes  (which  may  be  considered  as  molecular),  that 
the  experiments  with  the  ray  of  light  were  made  (2723.  2729.), 
and  also  that  in  these  and  other  experiments  instituted  for  the 
purpose,  a  polarized  ray  was  employed  as  the  examiner  ;  but  the 
results  were  always  negative,  w^ien  by  repetition  and  care  sources 
of  error  were  removed. 


Aug.  1850.]  by  magnetic  action.  181 

2752.  The  great  differences  in  the  degree  of  diaraagnetic  sus- 
ceptibihty  and  condition  which  the  gases  employed  in  the  fore- 
going experiments  possess  or  can  assume,  are  such  as  to  make 
one  ready  to  suppose,  that  if  they  show  no  tendency  in  any  case 
to  change  in  volume  under  the  action  of  the  magnet,  so  neither 
would  any  other  gas  or  vapour  do  so,  but  that  all  the  individuals 
belonging  to  this  great  class  of  bodies  would  be  alike  in  that 
respect.  In  connexion  with  this  conclusion  I  may  state,  that  I 
have  on  former  occasions,  and  more  lately,  endeavoured  to  ascer- 
tain, by  the  use  of  very  dehcate  apparatus  and  powerful  electro- 
magnets, whether  any  change  was  produced  in  the  volume  of 
such  fluids  as  water,  alcohol  and  solution  of  sulphate  of  iron, 
but  could  observe  no  effect  of  the  kind,  and  I  do  not  believe  in 
its  existence.  Still  more  recently,  and  in  reference  to  the  class 
of  sohd  bodies,  I  have  submitted  iron  as  a  magnetic  metal,  and 
bismuth  as  a  diamagnetic  body,  to  the  same  examination ;  the 
metals  were  employed  both  in  the  state  of  solid  cylinders  and  of 
fihngs  or  fragments.  The  cylinders  were  put  into  glass  tubes 
and  the  particles  into  glass  bottles ;  gauges,  like  those  described 
(2732.),  were  applied  to  them,  and  that  part  of  the  containing 
vessel  which  was  not  filled  with  metal,  was  occupied,  in  one  set 
of  experiments,  by  au',  and  in  another  by  alcohol,  yet  in  no  case 
could  the  least  change  in  the  volume  of  the  iron  or  bismuth  be 
observed,  however  powerful  the  magnetic  force  to  which  they 
were  submitted. 


2753.  One  other  result  of  a  repulsive  force  seemed  possible 
even  in  cases  when,  according  to  a  former  supposition  (2751.), 
the  tendency  to  expand  equatorially  might  be  compensated  by 
an  equal  amount  of  tendency  to  contract  in  the  axial  direction, 
namely,  that  of  the  production  of  currents  outwards  or  equatori- 
ally, i.  e.  in  lines  perpendicular  to  the  magnetic  axis,  where 
pointed  poles  or  the  hour-glass  core,  already  described,  were 
used,  and  of  other  currents  setting  in  towards  that  line  along 
the  inclined  surfaces  of  the  polar  terminations ;  in  some  degree 
like  those  occurring  so  powerfully,  and  traced  so  readily  when 
flame  or  hot  air  is  observed  in  air,  or  when  a  stream  of  one  gas 
is  observed  in  another  gas^ 


*  Philosophical  Magazine,  1847,  vol.  xxxi.  pp.  402,  404,  409. 


182  No  currents  produced  in  gases.       [Series  XXV. 

2754.  When  however  the  gas  occupying  the  whole  of  the 
magnetic  field  was  uniform  in  nature  and  aUke  in  temperature, 
not  the  shghtest  trace  of  such  currents  as  these  could  be  ob- 
serve^d.    It  is  not  easy  to  devise  unexceptionable  tests  of  such 
motions,  because  visible  bodies  introduced  into  such  a  mag- 
netic field  to  test  the  movements  of  the  air  there,  are  them- 
selves diamagnetic;  and  if  they  form  a  little  isolated  cloud,  are 
moved  together  and  away  as  a  diamagnetic  body  would  be ; 
but  when  the  whole  field  was  occupied  pretty  equally  by  very 
light  particles  of  dust  or  lycopodium,  and  the  magnet  m  power- 
ful action,  no  signs  of  currents  in  the  air  were  visible.  Further, 
when  a  faint  stream  of  diffuse  cold  smoke  from  a  taper  spark 
was  allowed  to  fall  or  rise  a  little  on  one  side  of  the  axial  hne, 
it  was  determined  outwards  and  equatorially ;  but  though  it 
went  outwards  with  the  most  force  when  equidistant  from  the 
two  conical  poles,  or  their  representative  parts  in  the  double 
iron  core  (2738),  still  when  it  was  made  to  pass  near  to  one 
side,  it  continued  to  go  outwards  and  equatorially,  even  when, 
from  its  close  vicinity  to  the  iron  surface,  it  had  as  it  were  to^ 
move  over  it ;  showing  that  the  tendency  of  the  smoke  was 
outwards  in  every  part  of  the  magnetic  field  occupied  by  air  or 
eas,  and  that  therefore  its  motion  was  due  to  the  action  ot  the 
magnet  on  it  as  a  diamagnetic,  and  not  to  currents  of  the  air, 
which,  if  existing,  would  be  inwards  in  one  place  or  direction, 
and  outwards  in  another. 

2755   When  magnetic  or  diamagnetic  fluids  were  subject  to 
the  magnetic  force  upon  a  plate  of  mica  over  the  poles  according 
to  the  ingenious  arrangement  of  Pliicker,  they  quickly  assumed 
the  different  forms  correspondent  to  their  nature,  but  after  that 
there  was  no  further  motion  or  current  in  them.    The  cases  are 
no  doubt  different  to  those  where  the  whole  of  the  magnetic 
field  is  occupied  by  the  same  medium;  still,  as  far  as  it  goes,  it 
helps  to  confirm  the  conclusion  that  no  currents  are  foiled. 
On  putting  the  same  liquids  between  the  poles  in  glass  cells,  no 
magnetic  currents  could  be  observed  in  them,  though  fine  par- 
ticles were  introduced  into  the  fluids,  for  the  purpose  of  making 
such  changes  of  place  visible,  if  they  occuri^d. 

2756.  So  there  is  no  evidence,  either  by  the  action  on  a  1  ay  of 
light  (2727.  2729.),  or  by  any  expansion  or  contraction  (2/50.), 
'  Philosophical  Magazine,  1847,  vol.  xxxi.  p.  403. 


Aug.  1850.]        Differential  magnetic  action. 


183 


or  by  the  production  of  any  currents  (2754.),  that  the  magnet 
exerts  any  direct  power  of  attraction  or  repulsion  on  the  particles 
of  the  difierent  gases  tried,  or  that  they  move  in  the  magnetic 
field,  as  they  are  known  to  do,  by  any  such  immediate  attraction 
or  repulsion. 

^  ii.  Differential  magnetic  action. 

2757.  Then  what  is  the  cause  of  the  diamagnetic  change  of 
place?  The  effect  is  evidently  a  differential  result,  depending 
upon  the  differences  of  the  two  portions  or  masses  of  matter 
occupying  the  magnetic  field,  as  the  air  and  the  streams  of  other 
gas  in  it^,  or  mercury  and  the  tube  of  air  in  it  (2407-),  or  water 
and  the  piece  of  bismuth  in  it  (2301.);  and  though  exhibited 
only  in  the  action  of  masses,  the  latter  must  no  doubt  owe  their 
differences  to  the  qualities  of  the  particles  composing  them.  Yet 
it  is  to  be  observed,  that  no  attempt  to  separate  the  perfectly 
mixed  particles  of  very  different  substances  has  ever  succeeded, 
though  made  with  most  powerful  magnets.  Oxygen  and  nitro- 
gen differ  exceedingly,  yet  no  appearance  of  the  least  degree  of 
separation  occurred  in  very  powerful  magnetic  fields^.  In  other 
experiments  I  have  enclosed  a  dilute  solution  of  sulphate  of  iron 
in  a  tube,  and  placed  the  lower  end  of  the  tube  between  the  poles 
of  a  powerful  horseshoe  magnet  for  days  together,  in  a  place  of 
perfectly  uniform  temperature,  and  yet  without  the  least  appear- 
ance of  any  concentration  of  the  solution  in  that  end  which  might 
indicate  a  tendency  in  the  particles  to  separate. 


2758.  The  diamagnetic  phaenomena  of  the  gases,  when  consi- 
dered as  the  differential  result  of  the  action  of  volumes  of  these 
bodies,  may  be  produced  and  examined  in  a  very  useful  manner 
by  the  employment  of  soap-bubbles,  as  follows : — A  glass  tube 
was  fitted  with  a  cap,  stopcock  and  bladder,  so  that  any  given 
gas  contained  in  the  bladder  might  be  sent  through  it,  and  also 
with  a  foot  or  stand  so  that  it  might  be  placed  in  any  required 
position.  The  end  of  the  tube  was  drawn  down,  bent  at  right 
angles,  and  cut  off  straight  across  at  the  extremity,  being  of 

'  Philosophical  Magazine,  1847,  vol.  xxxi.  p.  409.  ^  Ibid.  p.  416. 


184  Differential  magnetic  action       [Series  XXV 

the  size  and  shape  repre-   ^'S'  ^' 

sented  in  fig.  4.  V 

2759.  It  is  easy  to  blow  1  

soap-bubbles  at  the  end  of 
such  a  tube,  of  any  size  up 
to  an  inch  in  diameter,  and 
retain  them  for  the  time  re- 
quired by  the  action  of  the 
stopcock.  The  soapy  water 
should  be  prepared,  when 
wanted  (andnotbeforehand), 
by  putting  a  cutting  or  two  of  soap  into  a  Uttle  cold  distilled  water, 
for  then  bubbles  of  the  thinnest  and  most  equable  texture  can 
be  blown,  which  are  more  mobile  than  if  thicker  suds  be  used, 
and  if  a  little  care  be  taken,  quite  permanent  enough  for  every 
useful  experiment.  The  end  of  the  pipe  should  be  perfectly 
clean  and  free  from  heterogeneous  matter  (which  is  often  de- 
structive of  the  bubble),  and  should  be  wetted  both  inside  and 
outside  with  the  soap-water,  and  left  awhile  in  it  before  use. 

2760.  If  a  bubble  be  blown  with  the  end  of  the  tube  down- 
wards, and  be  half  an  inch  in  diameter,  it  will  usually  have  a 
ittle  extra  water  at  the  bottom,  and  will  hang  from  the  slender 
extremity  of  the  tube  by  an  attachment  so  small  as  to  allow  it 
great  freedom  of  motion.  Hence  it  will  swing  to  and  fro  hke  a 
pendulum ;  and  according  as  there  is  more  or  less  water  at  the 
bottom,  it  will  vibrate  more  or  less  rapidly,  will,  as  a  whole, 
gravitate  more  or  less  powerfully,  and  therefore  will  retain  its 
perpendicularly  dependent  position  with  more  or  less  stability, 

 circumstances  which  are  very  useful  in  the  employment  of  the 

bubble  as  a  magnetic  or  diamagnetic  indicator. 

2761.  The  regulation  of  the  relative  quantity  of  water  which 
is  in  or  upon  the  bubble  is  easily  obtained  within  certain 
limits.  If,  after  the  pipe  is  dipped  in  the  soap-water,  the  end 
be  touched  with  a  piece  of  wood  or  glass  rod,  which  has  also 
been  kept  in  the  soap-water,  more  or  less  of  the  hquid  may  be 
removed ;  and  by  observing  the  height  at  which  the  fluid  stands 
by  capillary  action  within  the  tube,  which  may  be  varied  between 
^^-th  and  an  inch,  it  is  easy,  after  a  few  experimental  trials,  to 
observe  how  much  is  required  to  make  a  bubble  charged  with  a 
certain  amount  of  water,  and  how  little  to  give  a  bubble  with  out 


Aug.  1850.]  shoivn  by  bubbles  of  gas.  185 

any  dependent  water  below ;  and  then  it  is  just  as  easy,  by  ar- 
ranging the  amount  of  water  beforehand,  to  blow  a  bubble  of  any 
required  character.  Even  when  no  drop  of  water  is  left  at  the 
bottom,  still  a  range  of  thickness  or  thinness  in  the  film  itself 
can  be  obtained. 

2762.  As  the  bubbles  contain  less  and  less  of  water,  so  are 
they  rendered  more  sensitive  in  their  action.  They  vibrate  slower, 
and  are  more  easily  moved  by  forces  applied  laterally  to  them. 
The  diamagnetic  effect  of  the  soap-water  constituting  them  is 
less,  and  therefore  that  of  the  gas  contained  within  them  com- 
paratively greater.  If  the  bubble  is  very  thin,  the  dependent 
position  becomes  a  position  of  unstable  equilibrium,  for  any  in- 
clination of  the  tube,  or  any  lateral  force,  however  small,  then 
causes  the  bubble  to  pass  to  one  side,  and  to  run  up  and  adhere 
to  the  side  of  the  tube,  fig.  5.  Fig.  5. 

The  dependent  position  sup- 
plies, in  inclosed  spaces  or  at- 
mospheres, an  exceedingly  de- 
licate indicator;  and  even  when 
the  bubble  is  on  the  side  of  the 
tube  it  still  forms  a  very  valu- 
able instrument,  for  it  freely 
moves  round  the  tube  as  axis ; 
and  as  it- possesses  a  certain 
degree  of  steadiness,  it  can  be 
held  in  the  magnetic  field  in 
any  position,  and  by  its  motion  to  or  from  the  axial  line,  shows 
very  well  the  magnetic  or  diamagnetic  condition  of  the  gas  con- 
tained in  it  in  relation  to  the  surrounding  air. 

2763.  If  the  mouth  of  the  tube  be  turned  upwards,  bubbles 
of  the  thinnest  texture  can  be  blown;  but  they  are  then  also 
very  unstable  in  position,  and  run  to  the  side  of  the  tube ;  they 
can  be  used  as  indicators,  as  above  (2762.).  If  the  mouth  of 
the  tube  be  made  broader,  the  bubbles,  being  thin,  can  be  re- 
tained standing  on  the  extremity;  but  as  their  attachment  is 
larger,  so  they  require  more  force  to  move  them  sideways,  and 
teey  lose  in  delicacy  of  indication.  It  is  convenient,  in  work- 
ing with  such  bubbles,  to  make  them  nearly  equal  in  size  and 
thickness  for  the  same  set  of  comparative  experiments.  I 
usually  employ  them  about  half  an  inch  in  diameter. 


186  Differential  magnetic  action       [Series  XXV. 

2764.  On  blowing  such  a  bubble  with  air^  in  the  dependent 
position,  placing  it  in  the  angle  of  the  double  pole  on  a  level 
with  the  axial  line  (fig.  6),  and  then  putting  on  the  magnetic 
power  by  the  use  of  twenty  pair  of  plates.         Fig.  6. 

the  bubble  was  deflected  outwards  from  the 
axial  line  (or  equatorially)  with  a  certain 
amount  of  force,  and  returned  to  its  first  y///////^--^ 
position  on  the  interruption  of  the  electric  YIol/ \^ 
current.  The  deflection  was  not  great,  and  being  due  to  the 
water  of  the  bubble,  gave  an  indication  of  the  amount  of  that 
effect,  to  be  used  as  a  correction  in  experiments  with  other  gases. 

2765.  Nitrogen  in  air. — A  bubble  of  nitrogen  went  outwards 
or  equatorially  in  common  air  with  a  force  much  surpassing  the 
outward  tendency  of  a  bubble  of  air  (2764.),  in  a  very  striking 
and  illustrative  manner.  It  was  often  driven  up  from  the  end 
to  the  side  of  the  tube ;  and  when  on  the  side,  if  presented  in- 
wards, it  was  driven  to  the  outside  of  the  tube,  and  however  the 
tube  was  turned  round,  kept  that  position  as  long  as  the  magnetic 
force  was  maintained.  This  effect  is  the  more  striking  when  it 
is  considered  that  four-fifths  of  the  air  itself  is  nitrogen  gas. 

2766.  Oxygen  in  air, — The  effect  was  very  impressive,  the 
bubble  being  pulled  inwards  or  towards  the  axial  hue  sharply  and 
suddenly,  exactly  as  if  the  oxygen  M^ere  highly  magnetic.  The 
result  was  expected,  being  in  accordance  with  the  phenomena 
presented  by  oxygen  and  nitrogen  in  a  former  investigation  of 
the  diamagnetic  phsenomena  of  the  gases  ^ 

2767.  Nitrous  oxide  and  olefiant  gases  in  air.— The  bubbles 
went  outwards  or  diamagnetically  with  a  force  much  greater 
than  that  due  to  the  effect  of  the  water  of  the  bubble,  proving 
the  relation  of  these  gases  to  air,  and  according  with  the  results 
formerly  obtained  with  streams  of  these  substances^. 

2768.  There  is  no  difficulty  in  applying  this  method  of  ob- 
servation to  experiments  with  gases  in  atmospheres  of  other 
gases  than  air,  provided  they  be  such  as  do  not  destroy  the 
bubble ;  but  I  do  not  consume  time  by  detailing  the  results  of 
such  experiments,  which  accorded  perfectly  with  those  before 
obtained^.  The  description  given  is  quite  sufficient  to  illustrate 
the  point  stated,  namely,  that  the  motion  of  the  gases,  one  in 

1  Philosophical  Magazine,  1847,  vol.  xxxi.  pp.  410,  415. 

2  Ibid.  p.  411.  '  Ibid,  pp.414,  415. 


Aug.  1850.]         of  oxygen,  nitrogen,  space.  187 

another,  when  in  the  magnetic  field,  is  a  differential  result,  and 
supply  sufficient  cases  for  reference  hereafter. 

2769.  The  same  conclusion,  that  the  effect  is  a  differential 
result  of  the  masses  of  matter  present  in  the  magnetic  field,  is 
also  manifest  from  the  consideration  of  the  cases  of  gaseous, 
liquid,  and  solid  diamagnetic  bodies,  advanced  in  a  former  part 
of  these  Researches  (2405-14.) ;  and  a  conclusion  of  the  same 
kind,  as  regards  magnetic  bodies,  may  also  be  drawn  from  ex- 
periments then  described  (2361-68.). 

t  iii.  Magnetic  characters  of  Oxygen,  Nitrogen,  and  Sjmce. 

2770.  The  differential  action  of  two  portions  of  gas,  or  of  any 
two  bodies,  may,  by  a  more  elaborate  method,  be  examined  in  d 
manner  far  more  interesting  and  important  than  that  just  de- 
scribed. The  mode  of  action  referred  to  may  even  be  made  the 
basis  of  instruments,  by  which,  probably,  most  important  indi- 
cations and  measurements  of  both  magnetic  and  diamagnetic 
actions  may  be  obtained,  leading  to  results  which  are  not  even 
as  yet  contemplated  by  the  imagination. 

2771.  If  two  portions  of  matter,  gaseous  or  Hquid,  are  tied  toge- 
ther and  placed  in  a  symmetric  magnetic  field,  on  opposite  sides 
of  the  magnetic  axis,  they  will  be  simultaneously  affected.  If  both 
are  diamagnetic,  or  less  magnetic  than  the  medium  occupying 
the  magnetic  field,  both  will  tend  to  go  outwards  or  equatorially ; 
equally  if  they  are  alike,  but  unequally  if  they  differ.    The  con- 
sequence will  be,  that,  if  they  are  placed,  in  the  first  instance, 
equidistant  from  the  magnetic  axis,  the  supervention  of  the  mag- 
netic force  will  not  alter  their  position,  provided  they  be  alike ; 
but  if  they  differ,  then  their  position  will  be  changed;  for  the 
most  diamagnetic  will  move  outwards  equatorially,  pulling  the 
least  diamagnetic  inwards  until  the  two  are  in  such  new  positions 
that  the  forces  acting  on  them  are  equipoised,  and  they  will 
assume  a  position  of  stable  equilibrium.    Now  the  distance 
through  which  they  will  move  may  be  used  indirectly,  or  better 
still,  the  force  required  to  restore  them  to  their  equidistant  po- 
sition may  be  employed  directly  to  estimate  the  tendency  each 
had  to  go  from  the  magnetic  axis ;  that  is,  to  give  their  relative 
diamagnetic  intensities. 

2772.  That  I  might  submit  gases  to  such  a  method  of  exami- 


188 


Paramagnetic  character  of  oxygen.     [Series  XXV. 


nation,  I  selected  a  piece  of  very  thin  and  regular  flint-glass  tube, 
about  Y^^vths  of  an  inch  external  diameter,  and  not  more  than  f^jjth 
of  an  inch  in  thickness,  and  drawing  at  the  blow-pipe  lamp  two 
equable  portions  of  this  tube  into  the  shape  and  size  represented, 
fig.  7,  in  which  the  barrel  part  is  1 1  inch  long,  I  filled  one  with 

Fig.  7. 


oxygen  gas  and  the  other  with  nitrogen  gas,  and  then  sealed 
them  up  hermetically.  The  end  of  the  prolonged  part  of  each 
was  touched  whilst  warm  with  seahng-wax  and  a  thread  fastened 
to  it,  w^hich  thread  was  tied  into  a  loop,  also  represented  of  full 
size.  By  these  the  tvibes  w^ere  to  be  suspended  perpendicularly 
from  a  torsion  balance,  so  that  the  middle  of  each  should,  when 
in  place,  be  on  a  level  with  the  magnetic  axis. 

2773.  The  torsion  balance  consisted  of  a  bundle  of  sixty 
equally- stretched  cocoon  silk  fibres,  made  fast  above  to  a  vertical 
axis  carrying  a  horizontal  index  and  graduated  plate,  and  below  to 
a  horizontal  lever.  A  cross  bar,  about  1|  inch  long,  was  attached 
to  one  end  of  this  lever,  also  in  the  horizontal  plane ;  and  on 
the  extremities  of  this  cross  bar,  and  81  inches  from  the  centre 
of  motion,  were  hung  the  two  tubes  of  oxygen  and  nitrogen 
(2772.),  counterbalanced  by  a  weight  on  the  other  arm  of  the 
horizontal  level.  The  whole  was  thus  so  placed  and  adjusted  in 
relation  to  the  electro-magnet,  furnished  at  the  time  with  the 
double  cone  core  or  keeper  (2764.),  that  the  middle  part  of  each 
tube  was  level  with  the  middle  of  the  core,  and  equidistant  on 
each  side  from  it.  Under  ,  these  circumstances,  if  any  motion 
was  given  to  the  balance,  so  as  to  make  its  arm  vibrate,  the 
vibrations  were  made  with  great  slowness,  in  consequence  of  the 
weight  of  the  whole  moving  arrangement,  and  the  small  amount 
of  torsion  force  in  the  cocoon  silk. 

2774.  The  moment  the  magnetic  force  was  thrown  into  action 
all  things  changed.  The  oxygen  tube  was  immediately  carried 
inwards  towards  the  axis,  and  the  nitrogen  tube  driven  outwards 
on  the  contrary  side.  The  balance  swung  beyond  its  new  place 
of  rest  and  then  returned  with  considerable  power,  vibrating 
many  times  in  the  period,  which  before  was  filled  by  a  single 


3 


Aug.  1850.]    Magnetic  relations  of  oxygen  and  nitrogen.  189 

oscillation;  and  when  it  had  come  to  its  place  of  rest,  or  of 
stable  equilibrium,  the  oxygen  tube  was  about  one-eighth  of  an 
inch  from  the  iron  of  the  core,  and  the  nitrogen  tube  four-eighths 
distant.  Ten  revolutions  of  the  torsion  axis  altered  only  in  a 
slight  degree  these  relative  distances. 

2775.  The  actions  which  determine  the  mutual  self-adjustment 
of  the  oxygen  and  nitrogen,  as  regards  their  place  in  relation  to 
the  magnetic  axis,  are  very  simple  and  evident.  In  the  first 
place,  the  glass  of  the  tubes  is  more  diamagnetic  than  the  sur- 
rounding medium  or  air  (2424.),  and  therefore  each  tends  to 
move  outwards ;  but  being  equal  in  nature  and  condition  to  each 
other,  they  tend  to  move  with  equal  force  when  at  equal  distances, 
and  at  those  distances  compensate  each  other.  If  one  be  driven 
inwards,  it  is  subjected  to  a  greater  exertion  offeree  by  coming 
into  a  more  intense  part  of  the  magnetic  field ;  and  the  other, 
being  at  the  same  time  carried  outwards,  is  for  a  corresponding 
reason  in  a  place  of  less  intense  action  ;  and  therefore,  as  soon  as 
the  constraint  is  removed,  the  system  returns  to  its  position  of 
stable  equilibrium,  in  which  the  two  bodies  are  equidistant  from 
the  magnetic  axis. 

2776.  The  contents  also  of  the  tubes  are  subject  to  the  mag- 
netic forces,  and  as  the  result  shows  (2774.),  in  very  different 
degrees.  Either  the  oxygen  tends  inwards  much  more  forcibly 
than  the  nitrogen,  or  the  nitrogen  tends  outwards  more  power- 
fully than  the  oxygen ;  and  the  difference  must  exist  to  a  very 
great  degree,  for  it  is  such  as  to  carry  the  glass  of  the  oxygen 
tube  up  to  a  position  so  near  the  axis  that  it  could  not  by  itself, 
or  with  mere  air  inside,  retain  it  for  a  moment  without  the 
aid  of  considerable  restraint.  The  power  with  which  the  tubes 
only  would  retain  their  equidistant  position,  combined  with  the 
extent  to  which  they  are  displaced  from  this  position,  shows 
the  great  amount  of  force  which  this  conjoint  action  of  the 
oxygen  and  the  nitrogen  leaves  free  to  be  exerted  in  the  one  di- 
rection, namely,  from  the  oxygen  inwards  or  axially,  for  though 
the  action  be  complicated  the  result  is  simple.  By  former  ex- 
periments, the  nitrogen  is  known  to  pass  equatorially  and  the 
oxygen  axially  in  air^,  and  the  nitrogen  tube  will  pass  equatori- 
ally according  to  a  certain  differential  force,  depending  on  the 
flint-glass  and  the  nitrogen  on  the  one  hand,  and  the  bulk  of  air 

'  Philosophical  Magazine,  1847,  vol.  xxxi.  p.  409. 


190  Magnetic  character  of  oxygen  gas      [Series  XXV. 

displaced  by  them  on  the  other.  The  oxygen  tube  in  like  man- 
ner will  tend  to  pass  axially  by  a  differential  force,  the  amount 
of  which  will  depend  upon  the  tendency  of  the  oxygen  to  go 
axially,  of  its  tube  to  go  equatorially,  and  of  their  jomt  relation 
to  the  air  they  displace.  But  both  the  tubes  and  their  contents 
are  by  their  joint  relation  to  the  air  and  their  mechanical  con- 
nexion  so  related  to  each  other,  that  when  a  force  (as  of  torsion) 
is  employed  to  restore  them  to  their  equidistant  position  from 
the  magnetic  axis,  all  consideration  of  the  matter  of  the  tubes 
and  of  the  air  as  a  surrounding  medium  may  be  dismissed.  The 
gases  within  them  may  be  considered  as  in  immediate  relation 
with  each  other  and  the  magnetic  axis,  and  disembarrassed  from 
all  other  actions :  and  the  force  which  may  be  found  needful  to 
place  them  equidistant,  is  the  measure  of  their  magnetic  or  dia- 

magnetic  differences.  .    .  i  c 

2777.  Having  thus  explained  the  general  principles  ot  action, 
I  will  not  at  present  go  into  their  application  in  the  construction 
of  a  measuring  instrument  or  the  results  obtained  with  it,  further 

'  than  is  required  for  the  general  elucidation  of  magnetic  and 
diamagnetic  bodies,  and  the  determination  of  the  true  zero-point 
(2721.  2722.). 

2778.  The  principles  just  described  enabled  me  to  return  to  a 
method  of  investigation  which  on  a  former  occasion  greatly  ex- 
cited my  hopes  (2433.),  but  which  seemed  then  suddenly  cut  oft 
by  want  of  power.   Various  bodies,  whether  considered  as  mag- 
netic or  diamagnetic  substances,  admit  of  two  modes  of  treat- 
ment which  promise  to  be  exceedingly  instructive  as  regards 
their'properties  and  their  destined  purposes  m  natural  opera- 
tion    A  gas  may  be  heated  or  cooled,  and  the  effect  of  tempe- 
rature, which  is  known  to  be  very  influential,  may  now  be 
ascertained  without  any  change  in  the  bulk  of  the  gas ;  or  it 
may  be  rarefied  and  condensed  through  a-very  extensive  range, 
and  the  effect  of  this  kind  of  change  upon  it  ascertained  mde- 
pendent  of  temperature  or  the  presence  of  any  other  substance. 
Solids  and  liquids  do  not  admit  of  these  methods  of  exammation, 
and  do  not  therefore  assist  in  the  determination  of  the  zevo- 
point  and  of  the  true  distinction  of  magnetic  and  diamagnetic 
bodies  in  the  same  manner  that  the  gases  do. 

2779.  It  appeared  to  me  that  if  a  gaseous  body  were  mag- 
>  Philosophical  Magazine,  1847,  vol.  xxxi.  pp.  406,  417- 


Aug.  1850.]         proportionate  to  the  density. 


191 


netic,  then  its  magnetic  properties  ought  to  be  diminished  in 
proportion  as  it  was  rarefied,  i.  e.  that  equal  volumes  of  such  a 
gas  at  different  pressures  ought  to  be  more  magnetic,  as  they 
are  denser;  on  the  other  hand,  that  if  a  gas  were  diamagnetic, 
rarefaction  ought  to  diminish  its  diamagnetic  character,  until, 
when  reduced  to  the  condition  of  a  vacuum,  it  should  disappear. 
In  other  words,  if  two  opposed  portions  of  the  same  magnetic 
gas,  one  rarer  than  the  other,  were  subjected  at  once  to  the 
magnetic  force,  the  denser  ought  to  approach  the  axial  line,  or 
be  drawn  into  the  place  of  most  intense  action ;  whereas  if  two 
similarly  opposed  portions  of  a  diamagnetic  gas  were  subjected 
to  the  magnetic  action,  the  more  expanded  or  rarer  gas  ought  to 
go  inwards  to  the  place  of  strongest  action. 

2780.  Several  bulbs  of  oxygen  (fig.  8),  similar  in 
arrangement  to  those  already  described  (2772.),  and 
very  nearly  alike  in  size,  were  prepared  and  hermeti- 
cally sealed,  after  that  the  quantity  of  gas  within 
them  had  been  reduced  to  a  certain  degree  by  the 
air-pump.  The  first  contained  the  gas  at  the  press- 
ure of  one  atmosphere ;  the  second  had  the  gas  at 
half  an  atmosphere,  or  15  inches  of  mercury;  the 
third  contained  gas  at  the  pressure  of  10  inches  of 
mercury ;  and  the  fourth,  after  being  filled  with  oxy- 
gen, was  reduced  to  as  good  a  vacuum  as  an  excel- 
lent air-pump  could  effect.  When  the  first  of  these 
was  compared  with  the  other  three,  the  effect  was 
most  striking;  opposed  to  the  half  atmosphere,  it 
went  towards  the  axis',  driving  the  expanded  portion 
away  ;  when  in  relation  to  the  one-third  atmosphere, 
it  went  inwards  or  axially  with  still  more  power ;  and 
when  opposed  to  the  oxygen  vacuum,  it  took  its  place  as  close 
to  the  iron  core  as  in  the  former  case,  when  contrasted  with 
nitrogen  (2774.) ;  and  it  was  manifest  that  the  diamagnetic  power 
of  the  glass  tube  which  inclosed  it  (2775.),  was  the  only  thing 
which  prevented  the  oxygen  from  pressing  against  the  iron  core 
occupying  the  centre  of  the  magnetic  field. 

2781.  On  experimenting  with  the  other  tubes  exactly  the 
same  result  was  obtained.  Thus  the  tube  with  one-third  of  an 
atmosphere,  in  association  with  the  vacuum  tube,  went  inwards, 
driving  the  other  outwards,  i.  e.  it  was  more  magnetic  than  the 


192  Magnetic  character  of  oxygen  gas      [Series  XXV. 

vacuum ;  but  in  association  with  the  one-half  atmosphere  tube 
it  went  outwards,  whilst  the  denser  gas  passed  inwards.  Any 
one  of  the  tubes,  if  associated  with  another  having  a  rarer  atmo- 
sphere, passed  inwards  or  magnetically,  whilst  if  associated  with 
others  having  denser  atmospheres  it  passed  outwards,  being 
driven  off  by  the  superior  magnetic  force  of  the  denser  gas.  As 
far  as  I  could  ascertain  in  these  prehminary  forms  of  experiment, 
the  tendency  inwards  or  axially  appeared  to  be  in  proportion  to 
the  density  of  the  gas ;  but  the  exact  measurement  of  these 
forces  will  be  given  hereafter. 

2782.  Thus  oxygen  appears  to  be  a  very  magnetic  substance, 
for  it  passes  axially,  or  from  weaker  to  stronger  places  of  force, 
with  considerable  power;  a  conclusion  in  accordance  with  the 
result  of  former  observations  ^   Moreover  it  passes  more  power- 
fully when  dense  than  when  rare,  its  tendency  inwards  being 
apparently  in  proportion  to  its  density.    Hence,  as  the  oxygen 
is  removed,  the  magnetic  force  disappears  with  it,  until  when  a 
vacuum  is  obtained,  Uttle  or  no  trace  of  attraction  or  inward 
force  remains.    No  doubt  it  may  be  said  that  dense  oxygen  is 
less  diamagnetic  than  rare  oxygen,  or  a  vacuum.   This  however 
would  imply,  that  the  acting  force  of  a  substance,  as  the  oxygen, 
could  increase  in  proportion  as  the  quantity  of  the  substance 
diminished,  which  is  not,  I  think,  a  philosophical  assumption; 
and  besides  that,  other  reasons  will  soon  appear  to  show  that 
the  magnetic  condition  which  disappeai'S  as  the  oxygen  is  re- 
moved, belongs  to,  and  is  dependent  upon  that  substance,  and 
that  oxygen  is  therefore  a  truly  magnetic  body. 
•  2783.  Nitrogen,  being  the  other  and  larger  part  of  the  atmo- 
sphere, was  then  subjected  to  experiment,  and  three  tubes,  one 
containing  the  gas  at  a  pressure  of  30  inches  of  mercury,  another 
with  the  gas  at  the  pressure  of  15  inches,  and  the  third  reduced 
as  nearly  as  it  could  be  to  a  vacuum,  were  prepared  (2780.). 
When  these  were  compared  one  with  another  in  the  magnetic 
field,  they  were  found  to  be  so  nearly  ahke  as  not  to  be  distm- 
guishable  from  each  other,  i.  e.  they  remained  equidistant  from 
the  magnetic  axis.    I  do  not  mean  to  imply  that  nitrogen  at 
these  different  pressures  is  absolutely  the  same  bulk  for  bulk 
(an  instrument  now  under  construction  will  enable  me  hereafter 
to  compare  and  measure  with  infinitely  greater  accuracy,  and  to 
1  Philosophical  Magazine,  1847,  vol.  xxxi.  pp.  410,  415. 


Aug.  IS50.]    Magnetic  character- of  nitrogen  gas.  193 

ascertain  these  points) ;  but  as  compared  with  oxygen,  the  great 
and  extraordinary  differences  produced  by  rarefaction  there,  have 
no  corresponding  differences  here.  If  there  are  any,  they  are 
insensible  at  present,  and  may,  for  the  chief  purpose  of  this 
paper  and  the  determination  of  the  zero-point  between  mag- 
netics and  diamagnetics,  be  taken  as  nothing. 

27S4.  Nitrogen  therefore  appears  to  be  neither  magnetic  nor 
diamagnetic ;  if  it  were  either,  it  could  not  but  fall  in  its  specific 
condition  as  it  was  rarefied ;  as  it  is,  it  is  equivalent  to  a  vacuum. 
If  a  given  space  be  considered  as  a  vacuum,  into  which  oxygen 
or  nitrogen  is  to  be  gradually  introduced,  as  oxygen  is  added 
the  space  becomes  more  and  more  magnetic,  i.  e.  more  compe- 
tent to  admit  of  the  kind  of  action  distinguished  by  that  word ; 
but  the  corresponding  gradual  addition  of  nitrogen  to  an  empty 
space  produces  no  effect  of  that  kind,  or  the  contrary,  and  the 
nitrogen  is  therefore  neither  magnetic  nor  diamagnetic,  but  liice 
space  itself. 

2785.  As  yet  I  have  found  no  gas,  which,  being  on  the  dia- 
magnetic side  of  zero,  can  at  all  compare  with  oxygen  in  the 
range  of  effect  produced  by  rarefaction.  For  the  present,  I  may 
mention  defiant  gas  and  cyanogen  as  substances  which  appear 
to  proceed  inwards,  or  towards  the  axial  line,  as  they  are  more 
rarefied.  They  are  therefore  not  merely  at  zero,  but  are  in 
opposition  to  oxygen  and  are  diamagnetic  bodies.  But  if  we 
want  a  body  that  is  strongly  and  undeniably  diamagnetic,  and 
which,  being  added  to  or  introduced  into  space,  will  make  it 
diamagnetic,  as  oxygen  renders  it  magnetic,  then  flint  glass  or 
phosphorus  presents  us  with  such  a  substance.  "When  these 
bodies  are  made  into  forms  similar  to  the  volumes  of  nitrogen, 
or  the  vacua  in  size  and  shape,  and  are  compared  with  them  on 
the  torsion  balance,  they  pass  outwards  with  much  force ;  and  it 
is  probably  the  great  diamagnetic  force  of  the  glass  of  the  tubes 
that  prevents  the  effect  of  rarefaction  from  being  more  evident 
in  defiant  and  other  gases. 

2786.  When  a  tube  has  been  filled  with  a  particular  gas,  then 
exhausted  as  much  as  possible,  and  sealed  up  hermetically,  it 
may  be  considered  as  inclosing  what  is  commonly  called  a  va- 
cuum. I  have  prepared  many  such  vacua,  and  may  be  per- 
mitted to  distinguish  them  by  the  name  of  the  gas,  traces  of 
which  still  remain.    In  comparing  these  vacua  in  the  magnetic 

VOL.  III.  o 


194  Magnetic  character  of  space.       [Series  XXV. 

field  (2773.),  they  appeared  to  me  to  be  in  aU  respects  alike; 
the  oxygen  vacuum  was  not  more  magnetic  than  the  hydrogen, 
nitrogen,  or  olefiant  vacuum.  Their  differences,  if  any,  were  far 
smaller  than  the  differences  which  could  be  produced  by  the 
variations  of  size  and  other  conditions  of  the  glass  bulbs,  and 
can  only  be  made  manifest  by  the  means  hereafter  to  be  used 
(2783.) ;  and  I  am  fully  persuaded  that  they  will  ultimately  be 
nearly  ahke,  ranging  close  up  to  and  about  a  perfect  vacuum. 

2787.  Before  determining  the  place  of  zero  amongst  magnetic 
and  diamagnetic  bodies,  we  have  to  consider  the  true  character 
and  relation  of  space  free  from  any  material  substance.  Though 
one  cannot  procure  a  space  perfectly  free  from  matter,  one  can 
make  a  close  approximation  to  it  in  a  carefully  prepared  Torri- 
cellian vacuum.    Perhaps  it  is  hardly  necessary  for  me  to  state, 
that  I  find  both  iron  and  bismuth  in  such  vacua  perfectly 
obedient  to  the  magnet.   From  such  experiments,  and  also  from 
general  observations  and  knowledge,  it  seems  manifest  that  the 
lines  of  magnetic  force  (2149.)  can  traverse  pure  space,  just  as 
gravitating  force  does,  and  as  static  electrical  forces  do  (1616.) ; 
and  therefore  space  has  a  magnetic  relation  of  its  own,  and  one 
that  we  shall  probably  find  hereafter  to  be  of  the  utmost  import- 
ance in  natural  ph^enomena.    But  this  character  of  space  is 
not  of  the  same  kind  as  that  which,  in  relation  to  matter,  we 
endeavour  to  express  by  the  terms  magnetic  and  diamagnetic. 
To  confuse  them  together  would  be  to  confound  space  with 
matter,  and  to  trouble  all  the  conceptions  by  which  we  endea- 
vour to  understand  and  work  out  a  progressively  clearer  view  ot 
the  mode  of  action  and  the  laws  of  natural  forces.  It  would  be  as 
if,  in  gravitation  or  electric  forces  (1613.),  one  were  to  confound 
the  particles  acting  on  each  other  with  the  space  across  which 
they  are  acting,  and  would,  1  think,  shut  the  door  to  advance- 
ment.   Mere  space  cannot  act  as  matter  acts,  even  though  the 
utmost  latitude  be  allowed  to  the  hypothesis  of  an  ether;  and 
admitting  that  hypothesis,  it  would  be  a  large  additional  assump- 
tion to  suppose  that  the  lines  of  magnetic  force  are  vibrations 
carried  on  by  it  (2591.) ;  whilst  as  yet,  we  have  no  proof  or  m- 
dication  that  time  is  required  for  their  propagation,  or  m  what 
respect  they  may  in  general  character  assimilate  to,  or  differ 
from,  the  respective  Unes  of  gravitating,  luminiferous,  or  electric 

forces.  .  ' 


Aug.  1850.]       Magnetic  zero-magnetic  terms. 


195 


2788.  Neither  can  space  be  supposed  to  have  those  circular 
currents  round  points  diffused  through  it,  which  Ampere's  theory 
assumes  to  exist  around  the  particles  of  ordinary  magnetic  matter, 
and  which  I  had  for  a  moment  supposed  might  exist  in  the  con- 
trary direction  round  the  particles  of  diamagnetic  matter  (2429. 
2640.  Ike).  The  imagination,  restrained  by  philosophical  con- 
siderations, fails  to  find  anything  in  pure  space  about  which  the 
currents  could  circulate,  or  to  which  they  could  by  any  associa- 
tion be  attached ;  and  the  difficulty,  if  already  not  immeasurable, 
would  be  still  greater  to  those,  if  there  be  any,  who,  assuming 
that  magnetic  and  diamagnetic  bodies  are  alike  in  nature,  must 
assume  that  there  are  like  currents  in  both ;  for  it  does  not  seem 
possible  to  add  (for  instance)  phosphorus  having  such  a  magnetic 
constitution,  to  space  supposed  to  be  of  a  similar  constitution, 
and  yet  to  have  as  a  result  a  diminution  of  the  magnetic  powers 
of  the  space  so  occupied. 

2789.  As  space  therefore  comports  itself  independently  of 
matter,  and  after  another  manner,  the  different  varieties  of  mat- 
ter must,  in  relation  to  their  respective  qualities,  be  considered 
amongst  themselves.  Those  which  produce  no  effect  when  added 
to  space,  appear  to  me  to  be  neutral  or  to  stand  at  zero.  Those 
which  bring  with  them  an  effect  of  one  kind  will  be  on  the  one 
side  of  zero,  and  those  which  produce  an  effect  of  the  contrary 
kind  will  be  on  the  other  side  of  zero ;  by  this  division  they  consti- 
tute the  two  subdivisions  of  magnetic  and  diamagnetic  bodies. 
The  law  which  I  formerly  ventured  to  give  (2267.  2418.),  still 
expresses  accurately  their  relations ;  for  in  an  absolute  vacuum 
or  free  space,  a  magnetic  body  tends  from  weaker  to  stronger 
places  of  magnetic  action,  and  a  diamagnetic  body  under  similar 
conditions  from  stronger  to  weaker  places  of  action. 

2790.  Now  that  the  true  zero  is  obtained,  and  the  great 
variety  of  material  substances  satisfactorily  divided  into  two 
general  classes,  it  appears  to  me  that  we  want  another  name  for 
the  magnetic  class,  that  we  may  avoid  confusion.  The  word 
magnetic  ought  to  be  general,  and  include  all  the  phenomena 
and  effects  produced  by  the  power.  But  then  a  word  for  the 
subdivision,  opposed  to  the  diamagnetic  class,  is  necessary.  As 
the  language  of  this  branch  of  science  may  soon  require  general 
and  careful  changes,  I,  assisted  by  a  kind  friend,  have  thought 
that  a  word  not  selected  with  particular  care  might  be  provi- 

o  2 


196        Magnetic  character  of  different  gases.  [Series  XXV. 

sionally  useful ;  and  as  the  magnetism  of  iron,  nickel  and  cobalt, 
when  in  the  magnetic  field,  is  like  that  of  the  earth  as  a  whole, 
so  that  when  rendered  active  they  place  themselves  parallel  to 
its  axes  or  lines  of  magnetic  force,  I  have  supposed  th!it  they 
and  their  similars  (including  oxygen  now)  might  be  called  para- 
magnetic bodies,  giving  the  following  division  :— 

f  Paramagnetic. 
^^S"^^'nDiamagnetic. 
If  the  attempt  to  facilitate  expression  be  not  accepted,  I  hope 
it  will  be  excused. 


2791.  From  the  presence  of  oxygen  in  the  air,  the  latter  is, 
as  a  whole,  a  magnetic  medium  of  no  small  power.    Hence  all 
the  comparative  experiments  on  the  diamagnetic  condition  o 
other  gases,  made  by  passing  streams  of  them  through  it  and 
through  each  otherS  require  a  correction,  which  occasionally 
may  place  some  of  these  bodies  on  the  paramagnetic  side  ot 
zero     Even  solid  and  fluid  substances  may  be  thus  affected ; 
and 'the  preliminary  list,  which  1  formerly  gave  (2424  ),  w  ill 
need  alteration  in  this  respect.    I  hope  soon  however  to  have 
the  means  of  ascertaining,  not  only  the  place  of  bodies,  but  also 
their  relative  degrees  of  force,  at  the  same  and  at  different  tem- 
peratures, with  a  degree  of  accuracy  that  will  serve  great  pur- 
poses in  the  further  development  of  this  branch  of  science. 

2792.  Amongst  the  gases  hitherto  examined  there  is  nothing 
that  compares  with  oxygen.  The  following  are  comparatively 
ndifferenl  by  the  side  of  it -.-chlorine  and  bromme  vapour, 
cyanogen,  nitrogen,  hydrogen,  carbonic  acid,  carbonic  oxid  , 
olefiant  gas,  nitrous  oxide,  nitric  oxide,  nitrous  acid  vapour,  muri- 
atic acid!  sulphurous  acid,  hydriodic  acid,  ammoma,  sulphuretted 
Sen  coal-gas,  ^ther  vapour  and  sulphuret  of  carbon  vapour ; 
for  W  ^^^^  as  olefiant  and  cyanogen  gases,  appear  to  be  a 
MrZmagnetic^  and  others,  as  nitrous  oxide  and  n^tnc  o-de 
are  magnetrc,  yet  their  effects  disappear  in  comparison  with  the 
results  produced  by  oxygen.  ^         fi^p  nnramaff- 

979-3  I  hope  to  give  the  correct  expression  of  the  paiamag- 
.fiP  force  of  oxygen  (2783.)  hereafter,  in  the  meantime  I  am 
tempted  to  gi^e  ^ne  oi  two  rough  illustrations  of  its  degree  in 
.  Philosophical  Magazine,  1847,  vol.  xxxi.  pp.  407.  420,  &c. 


Aug.  1850.]    Paramagnetic  force  of  oxygen  gas. 


197 


this  place,  in  addition  to  the  former  one  (2774.).  The  capacity 
of  the  oxygen  bulb,  containing  one  atmosphere,  is  not  quite  0-34 
of  a  cubic  inch,  and  the  weight  therefore  of  the  oxygen  within 
0-117  of  a  grain.  I  endeavoured  to  compare  this  quantity  in 
the  first  place  with  soft  iron,  and  therefore  attached  a  portion 
of  that  metal,  having  one-tenth  of  this  weight  or  0-012  of  a  grain, 
to  a  fine  platina  wire  fixed  into  one  end  of  a  vessel,  correspond- 
ing in  size  to  that  containing  the  oxygen,  so  as  to  bring  the  iron 
into  the  middle,  and  then  the  bulb  was  exhausted  and  hermeti- 
cally sealed.  Being  now  opposed  to  the  oxygen  tube  in  the 
magnetic  field,  it  was  found,  as  expected,  far  to  surpass  the 
oxygen  in  magnetic  power.  As  it  was  inconvenient  further  to 
reduce  the  iron  or  to  enlarge  the  oxygen,  another  magnetic  sub- 
stance was  employed  for  the  comparison. 

2794.  One  hundred  grains  of  clean,  good,  crystalHzed  proto- 
sulphate  of  iron  were  dissolved  in  distilled  water,  and  diluted 
until  a  glass  bulb,  of  nearly  the  same  size  as  the  oxygen  bulb 
when  filled  with  the  solution,  was  equal  to  the  oxygen  bulb  in 
force,  and  stood  equidistant  from  the  axial  line,  as  far  as  I  could 
judge  by  the  present  modes  of  observation.  When  the  solution 
had  this  strength,  it  occupied  the  bulk  of  17^  cubic  inches.  As 
the  bulk  of  the  oxygen  is  only  0-34  of  a  cubic  inch  (2793.), 
that  volume  of  this  solution  would  contain  very  nearly  two  grains 
of  crystallized  sulphate  of  iron,  equivalent  to  0'4  of  a  grain  of 
metallic  iron ;  so  that,  bulk  for  bulk,  oxygen  is  equally  magnetic 
with  a  solution  of  sulphate  of  iron  in  water  containing  seventeen 
times  the  weight  of  the  oxygen  in  crystallized  protosulphate  of 
iron,  or  3 "4  times  its  weight  of  metallic  iron  in  that  state  of 
combination. 

2795.  Again,  the  oxygen  tubes,  containing  respectively  one 
atmosphere  and  a  vacuum  (2780.),  were  adjusted  about  an  inch 
apart,  and  placed  on  each  side  of  the  magnetic  axis,  and  the 
force  of  the  magnet  developed.  The  oxygen  of  course  approached 
the  magnetic  axis,  and  the  vacuum  passed  equatorially.  A  slen- 
der glass  filament,  about  6  inches  in  length,  had  been  drawn 
out  at  the  lamp  and  fixed  to  a  foot ;  and  the  end  of  this  filament 
was  then  employed  to  press  back  the  oxygen  tube  into  its  ori- 
ginal place,  and  render  it  equidistant  from  the  magnetic  axis 
with  the  vacuum  tube.  In  this  position  the  two  tubes  would, 
as  respects  the  glass,  neutralize  each  other  (2775.);  and  con- 


198  Paramagnetic  force  of  oxygen  gas.  [Series  XXV. 

sidering  the  vacuum  as  zero,  the  oxygen  alone  may  be  considered 
as  active,  and  the  force  required  to  hold  it  out  may  be  looked 
upon  as  the  force  with  which  the  oxygen,  at  that  distance  of 
half  an  inch,  tended  to  go  to  the  magnetic  axis.   The  deflection 
of  the  glass  filament  or  spring,  at  the  place  where  the  oxygen 
tube  was  held  by  it,  was  rather  more  than  one  inch  from  its 
position  when  relieved  from  the  pressure  of  the  tube.  Being 
taken  away,  it  was  set  up  in  the  horizontal  position  (after  being 
turned  90°  on  its  axis,  so  that  the  flexure  might  be  in  the  same 
direction,  relative  to  the  filament,  as  before) ;  and  the  position 
of  the  end  being  marked,  weights  were  put  on  it  at  the  place  of 
former  contact  with  the  oxygen  tube,  until  they  produced  the 
same  amount  of  deflection  as  before.    It  required  rather  more 
than  the  tenth  of  a  grain  to  produce  this  effect;  and  this,  consi- 
dering that  the  whole  oxygen  only  weighed  0-117  of  a  grain, 
and  that  no  part  of  it  was  nearer  than  half  an  inch,  whilst  the 
average  distance  of  the  mass  was  above  an  inch  from  the  mag- 
netic axis,  gives  a  high  expression  for  the  magnetic  power. 

2796.  It  is  hardly  necessary  for  me  to  say  here  that  this 
oxygen  cannot  exist  in  the  atmosphere,  exerting  such  a  remark- 
able and  high  amount  of  magnetic  force,  without  having  a  most 
important  influence  on  the  disposition  of  the  magnetism  of  the 
earth  as  a  planet,  especially  if  it  be  remembered  that  its  mag- 
netic condition  is  greatly  altered  by  variations  in  its  density 
(2781.)  and  by  variations  in  its  temperature ^    I  think  I  see 
here  the  real  cause  of  many  of  the  variations  of  that  force,  which 
have  been,  and  are  now,  so  carefully  watched  on  different  parts 
of  the  surface  of  the  globe.    The  daily  variation  and  the  annual 
variation  both  seem  likely  to  come  under  it;  also  very  many  of 
the  irregular  continual  variations  which  the  photographic  pro- 
cess of  record  renders  so  beautifully  manifest.  If  such  expecta- 
tions be  confirmed,  and  the  influence  of  the  atmosphere  be 
found  able  to  produce  results  like  these,  then  we  shall  probably 
find  a  new  relation  between  the  aurora  borealis  and  the  mag- 
netism of  the  earth,  namely,  a  relation  established,  more  or  less 
through  the  air  itself  in  connexion  with  the  space  above  it;  and 
even  magnetic  relations  and  variations  which  are  not  as  yet  sus- 
pected may  be  suggested  and  rendered  manifest  and  measurable, 
in  the  further  development  of  what  I  will  venture  to  call  Aimo- 
'  Philosophical  Magazine,  1847,  vol.  xxxi,  p.  4l7. 


Aug.  1850.]  Atmosp?ieric  magnetism. 


199 


spheric  Magnetism  (2847.  &c.).  I  may  be  over-sanguine  ia 
these  expectations,  but  as  yet  I  am  sustained  in  them  by  the 
apparent  reahty,  simplicity  and  sufficiency  of  the  cause  assumed, 
as  it  at  present  appears  to  my  mind.  As  soon  as  I  have  suffi- 
ciently submitted  these  views  to  a  close  consideration  and  the 
test  of  accordance  with  observation,  and  where  applicable  with 
experiments  also,  I  will  do  myself  the  honour  to  bring  them 
before  the  Royal  Society, 

Royal  Institution,  August  2,  1850. 


200 


TWENTY-SIXTH  SERIES  ^ 

§  32.  Magnetic  conducting  power,  t  i.  Magnetic  conduction. 
t  ii.  Conduction  polarity.  *1[  iii.  Magnecrystallic  conduction. 
§  33.  Atmospheric  magnetism.    H  i.  General  Principles. 

Received  October  9^— Read  November  28,  1850. 

^  i.  Magnetic  conduction. 

2797.  The  reniarkable  results  given  in  a  former  series  of  these 
Researches  (2757-  &c.)  respecting  the  powerful  tendency  of  cer- 
tain gaseous  substances  to  proceed  either  to  or  from  the  central 
line  of  magnetic  force,  according  to  their  relation  to  other 
substances  present  at  the  same  time,  and  yet  the  absence  of 
all  condensation  or  expansion  of  these  bodies  (2756.)  which 
might  be  supposed  to  be  consequent  on  such  an  amount  of  at- 
tractive or  repulsive  force  as  would  be  thought  needful  to  pro- 
duce this  tendency  and  determination  to  particular  places,  have, 
upon  consideration,  led  me  to  the  idea,  that  if  bodies  possess 
different  degrees  of  conducting  power  for  magnetism,  that  dit- 
ference  may  account  for  all  the  phsenomena;  and,  further,  that 
if  such  an  idea  be  considered,  it  may  assist  in  developmg  the 
nature  of  magnetic  force.    I  shall  therefore  venture  to  think 
and  speak  freely  on  this  matter  for  a  while,  for  the  purpose  of 
drawing  others  into  a  consideration  of  the  subject  ;  though  1 
run  the  risk,  in  doing  so,  of  falling  into  error  through  imperfec 
experiments  and  reasoning.    As  yet,  however,  I  only  state  the 
case  hypothetically,  and  use  the  phrase  conducting  po^ver  as  a 
genera'  expression  of  the  capability  which  bodies  may  possess  of 
Effecting  the  transmission  of  magnetic  force ;  implying  nothing 
ns  to  how  the  process  of  conduction  is  earned  on.    Thus  limited 
in  sense,  the  phrase  may  be  very  useful,  enabhng  us  to  take,  for 


1 


Philosopbical  Transactions,  1851,  p.  29.  _  ,o,o^n 
Revised  by  the  author  and  returned  by  him  November  12,  1850. 


Oct.  1850.]  Magnetic  conduction.  201 

a  time,  a  connected,  consistent  and  general  view  of  a  large  class 
of  phcenomena ;  may  serve  as  a  standard  of  meaning  amongst 
them,  and  yet  need  not  necessarily  involve  any  error,  inasmuch 
as  whatever  may  be  the  principles  and  condition  of  conduction, 
the  phcenomena  dependent  on  it  must  consist  among  them- 
selves. 

2798.  Tf  a  medium  having  a*  certain  conducting  power  occupy 
the  magnetic  field,  and  then  a  portion  of  another  medium  or 
substance  be  placed  in  the  field  having  a  greater  conducting 
power,  the  latter  will  tend  to  draw  up  towards  the  place  of 
greatest  force,  displacing  the  former.    Such  at  least  is  the  case 
with  bodies  that  are  freely  magnetic,  as  iron,  nickel,  cobalt  and 
their  combinations  (2357.  2363.  2367-  &c.),  and  such  a  result  is 
in  analogy  with  the  phaenomena  produced  by  electric  induction. 
If  a  portion  of  still  higher  conducting  power  be  brought  into 
play,  it  will  approach  the  axial  line  and  displace  that  which  had 
just  gone  there ;  so  that  a  body  having  a  certain  amount  of  con- 
ducting power,  will  appear  as  if  attracted  in  a  medium  of  weaker 
power,  and  as  if  repelled  in  a  medium  of  stronger  power  by  this 
differential  kind  of  action  (2367-  2414.). 

2799.  At  the  same  time  that  this  idea  of  conduction  will  thus 
account  for  the  place  which  a  given  substance  would  take  up,  as 
of  oxygen  in  the  axial  line  if  in  nitrogen,  or  of  nitrogen  at  a 
distance  if  in  oxygen,  it  also  harmonizes  with  the  fact,  that  there 
are  no  currents  induced  in  a  single  gas  occupying  the  magnetic 
field  (2754.),  for  any  one  particle  can  then  conduct  as  well  as 
any  other,  and  therefore  will  keep  its  place ;  and  it  also  agrees, 
I  think,  with  the  unchangeability  of  volume  (2750.). 

2800.  In  reference  to  the  latter  point,  we  have  to  consider 
that  the  force  which  urges  such  a  body  as  oxygen  towards  the 
middle  of  the  field,  is  not  a  central  force  like  gravitation,  or  the 
mutual  attraction  of  a  set  of  particles  for  each  other ;  but  an 
axial  force,  which,  being  very  different  in  character  in  the  direc- 
tion of  the  axis  and  of  the  radii,  may,  and  must  produce  its  effect 
in  a  very  different  manner  to  a  purely  central  force.  That  these 
differences  exist,  is  manifest  by  the  action  of  transparent  bodies, 
when  in  the  magnetic  field,  upon  a  ray  of  light ;  and  also  by  the 
ordinary  action  of  magnetic  bodies :  and  hence,  perhaps,  the 
reason,  that  when  oxygen  is  drawn  into  the  middle  of  the  field, 
in  consequence  of  its  conducting  power,  still  its  particles  are 


202  Magnetic  conduction.      [Series  XXVI. 

not  compressed  together  (2721.)  by  a  force  that  otherwise  would 
seem  equal  to  that  eiFect  (2766.). 

2801.  So  when  two  separate  portions  of  oxygen  or  nitrogen 
are  in  the  magnetic  field,  the  one  passes  inwards  and  the  other 
outwards,  without  any  contraction  or  expansion  of  their  relative 
volumes ;  and  the  result  is  differential,  the  two  bodies  being  in 
relation  to  and  dependence  on  each  other,  by  being  simultane- 
ously related  to  the  hnes  of  magnetic  force  which  pass  conjointly 
through  them  both,  or  through  them,  and  the  medium  in  which 
they  are  conjointly  immersed. 

2802.  I  have  already  said,  in  reference  to  the  transference 
onwards  of  magnetic  force  (2787.),  that  pure  space  or  a  vacuum 
permits  that  transference,  independent  of  any  function  that  can 
be  considered  as  of  the  same  nature  as  the  conducting  power  of 
matter ;  and  in  a  manner  more  analogous  to  that  in  which  the 
lines  of  gravitating  force,  or  of  static  electric  force,  pass  across 
mere  space.    Then  as  respects  those  bodies  which,  like  oxygen, 
faciUtate  the  transmission  of  this  power  more  or  less,  they  class 
too-ether  as  magnetic  or  paramagnetic  substances  (2790.)  ;  and 
those  bodies,  which,  like  defiant  gas  or  phosphorus,  give  more 
or  less  obstruction,  may  be  arranged  together  as  the  diamagnetic 
class.    Perhaps  it  is  not  correct  to  express  both  these  qualities 
by  the  term  conduction;  but  in  the  present  state  of  the  subject, 
and  under  the  reservation  already  made  (27970.  the  phrase  may 
I  think  be  employed  conveniently  without  introducing  con- 

^^^2803.  If  such  be  a  correct  general  view  of  the  nature  and  dif- 
ferences of  paramagnetic  and  diamagnetic  substances,  then  the 
internal  processes  by  which  they  perform  their  functions  can 
hardly  be  the  same,  though  they  might  be  similar.  Thus  they 
mav  have  circular  electric  currents  in  opposite  directions,  but 
their  distinction  can  scarcely  be  supposed  to  depend  upon  the 
difference  of  force  of  currents  in  the  same  direction,  it  the 
view  be  correct  also,  though  the  results  obtained  when  two  bodies 
are  simultaneously  present  in  the  magnetic  field  may  be  consi- 
dered  as  differential  (2770.  2768.)  even  though  one  of  them  be 
the  general  medium,  yet  the  consequence  of  the  presence  of 
conducting  power  in  matter  renders  a  single  body,  when  in 
snace  subject  to  the  magnetic  force  ;  and  the  result  is,  tha 
when'a  paramagnetic  substance  is  in  a  magnetic  field  of  unequal 


Oct.  1850.]  Magnetic  conduction.  203 

force,  it  tends  to  proceed  from  weaker  to  stronger  places  of  ac- 
tion, or  is  attracted',  and  when  a  diamagnetic  body  is  similarly 
circumstanced,  it  tends  to  go  from  stronger  to  weaker  places  of 
action,  or  is  repelled  (2756.). 

2804.  Matter,  when  its  powers  are  under  consideration,  may, 
as  to  its  quantity,  be  considered  either  by  weight  or  by  volume. 
In  the  present  case,  where  the  effects  produced  have  an  imme- 
diate reference  to  mere  space  (2787.  2802.),  it  seems  proper  tha 
the  volume  should  be  considered  as  the  representation,  and  that 
in  comparing  one  substance  wdth  another,  equal  volumes  should 
be  employed  to  give  correct  results.  No  other  method  could  be 
used  with  the  differential  system  of  observation  (2772.  2780.). 

2805.  Some  experimental  evidence,  other  than  that  of  change 
of  situation,  of  the  existence  of  this  conducting  power,  by  dif- 
ferences in  which,  I  am  endeavouring  to  account  for  the  peculiar 
characteristics  of  paramagnetic  and  diamagnetic  bodies,  may  well 
be  expected.  This  evidence  exists ;  but  as  certain  considerations 
connected  with  polarity  preclude  me  from  caUing  too  freely  upon 
iron,  cobalt,  or  nickel  (2832.)  for  illustrations,  and  as  in  other 
bodies  which  are  paramagnetic,  as  w^ell  as  in  those  that  are  dia- 
magnetic, the  effects  are  very  weak,  they  will  be  better  compre- 
hended after  some  further  general  consideration  of  the  subject 
(2843.). 


2806.  1  will  now  endeavour  to  consider  what  the  influence  is 
which  paramagnetic  and  diamagnetic  bodies,  viewed  as  conduc- 
tors (2797.)j  .6xert  upon  the  lines  of  force  in  a  magnetic  field. 
Any  portion  of  space  traversed  by  lines  of  magnetic  power,  may 
be  taken  as  such  a  field,  and  there  is  probably  no  space  without 
them.     The  condition  of  the  field  may  vary  in  intensity  of 
power,  from  place  to  place,  either  along  the  lines  or  across 
them ;  but  it  will  be  better  to  assume  for  the  present  considera- 
tion a  field  of  equal  force  throughout,  and  I  have  formerly  de- 
scribed how  this  may,  for  a  certain  limited  space,  be  produced 
(2465.).    In  such  a  field  the  power  does  not  vary  either  along 
or  aci'oss  the  lines,  but  the  distinction  of  direction  is  as  great 
and  important  as  ever,  and  has  been  already  marked  and  ex- 
pressed by  the  term  axial  and  equatorial,  according  as  it  is 
either  parallel  or  transverse  to  the  magnetic  axis. 


Fig.  2. 


204  Magnetic  conduction.       [Series  XXVI. 

2807.  When  a  paramagnetic  conductor,  as  for  instance,  a 
sphere  of  oxygen,  is  introduced  into  such  a  magnetic  field,  con- 
sidered previously  as  free  from  matter,  it  Fig.  i. 
will  cause  a  concentration  of  the  lines  of 
force  on  and  through  it,  so  that  the  space 
occupied  by  it  transmits  more  magnetic 
power  than  before  (fig.  1).  If,  on  the  other 
hand,  a  sphere  of  diamagnetic  matter  be 
placed  in  a  similar  field,  it  will  cause  a  di- 
vergence or  opening  out  of  the  lines  in  the 
equatorial  direction  (fig.  2) ;  and  less  mag- 
netic power  will  be  transmitted  through  the 
space  it  occupies  than  if  it  were  away. 

2808.  In  this  manner  these  two  bodies 
will  be  found  to  affect,  first  the  direction 
of  the*  lines  of  force,  not  only  within  the 
space  occupied  by  themselves,  but  also  in  the  neighbouring 
space,  into  which  the  lines  passing  through  them  are  prolonged ; 
and  this  change  in  the  course  of  the  lines  will  be  in  the  contrary 
direction  for  the  two  cases. 

2809.  Secondly,  they  will  affect  the  amount  of  force  in  any 
particular  part  of  the  space  within  or  near  them ;  for  as  every 
section  across  the  line  of  such  a  magnetic  field  must  be  definite 
in  amount  of  force,  and  be  in  that  respect  the  same  as  every 
other  section,  so  it  is  impossible  to  cause  a  concentration  within 
the  sphere  of  oxygen  (fig.  1)  without  causing  also  a  simultaneous 
concentration  in  the  parts  axially  situated  as  a  a  outside  of  it, 
and  a  corresponding  diminution  in  the  parts  equatorially  placed, 
b  b.  On  the  other  hand,  the  diamagnetic  body  (fig.  2)  will  cause 
diminution  of  the  magnetic  force  in  the  parts  of  space  axially 
placed  in  respect  of  it,  c  c,  and  concentration  in  the  near  equa- 
torial parts,  d  d.  If  the  magnetic  field  be  considered  as  limited 
in  its  extent  by  the  walls  of  iron  forming  the  faces  of  opposed 
poles  (2165.),  then  even  the  distribution  of  the  magnetism  within 
the  iron  itself  will  be  affected  by  the  presence  of  the  paramag- 
netic or  diamagnetic  bodies;  and  this  will  happen  to  a  very 
large  extent  indeed,  when,  from  among  the  paramagnetic  class, 
such  substances  as  iron,  nickel  or  cobalt  are  selected. 

2810.  The  influence  of  this  disturbance  of  the  forces  upon  the 
place  and  position  of  either  a  paramagnetic  or  a  diamagnetic 


Oct.  1850.]       Place  of  conductors  in  the  field.  205 

body  placed  within  the  magnetic  field,  is  readily  deduced  upon 
consideration  and  easily  made  manifest  by  experiment.  A  small 
sphere  of  iron  placed  within  a  field  of  equal  magnetic  power, 
bounded  by  the  iron  poles,  has  a  position  of  unstable  equili- 
brium, equidistant  from  the  iron  surfaces,  and  at  such  time  a 
great  concentration  of  force  takes  place  through  it,  and  at  the 
iron  faces  opposite  to  it,  and  through  the  intervening  axial 
spaces.  If  the  sphere  be  on  either  side  of  the  middle  distance, 
it  flies  to  the  nearest  iron  surface,  and  then  can  determine  the 
greatest  amount  of  magnetic  force  to  or  upon  the  axial  lines 
which  pass  through  it. 

2811.  If  the  iron  be  a  spheroid,  then  its  greatest  diameter 
points  axially,  whether  it  be  in  the  position  of  unstable  equili- 
brium, nearer  to  or  in  contact  with  the  iron  walls  of  the  field. 
As  the  circumstances  are  now  more  favourable  for  the  concen- 
tration of  force  in  the  axial  line  passing  through  the  body  than 
before,  so  this  result  can  be  produced  by  much  weaker  para- 
magnetics  than  iron,  and  I  have  no  doubt  could  easily  be  pro- 
duced by  a  vessel  of  oxygen  or  nitric  oxide  gas  (2782.  2792.). 
It  now  becomes  indeed  a  form,  though  not  the  best,  of  that  ex- 
periment by  which  the  magnetic  condition  of  bodies  is  considered 
as  most  sensitively  tested. 

2812.  The  relative  deficiency  *of  power  in  diamagnetic  bodies 
renders  any  attempt  to  obtain  the  converse  phaenomena  to  those 
of  iron  somewhat  difficult ;  in  order  therefore  to  exalt  the  con- 
ditions, I  used  a  saturated  solution  of  protosulphate  of  iron  in 
the  magnetic  field ;  by  this  means  I  strengthened  the  lines  of 
power  passing  across  it,  without  disturbing  its  equality  in  the 
parts  employed,  or  introducing  any  error  into  the  principle  of 
the  experiment,  and  then  used  bismuth  as  the  diamagnetic  body. 
A  cylinder  of  this  substance,  suspended  vertically,  tended  well 
towards  the  middle  distance,  finding  its  place  of  stable  equili- 
brium in  the  spot  where  the  paramagnetic  body  had  unstable 
equilibrium.  When  the  cylinder  was  suspended  horizontally, 
then  the  direction  it  took  was  equatorial  j  and  this  effect  also 
was  very  clear  and  distinct. 

2813.  These  relative  and  reverse  positions  of  paramagnetic 
and  diamagnetic  bodies,  in  a  field  of  equal  magnetic  force,  accord 
well  with  their  known  relations  to  each  other,  and  with  the  kind 
of  action  already  laid  down  in  principle  (2807-)  as  that  whrch 


206 


Magnetic  conduction.       [Series  XXVI. 


they  exert  on  the  magnetic  power  to  which  they  are  subjected. 
One  may  retain  them  in  the  mind  by  conceiving  that  if  a  Uquid 
sphere  of  a  paramagnetic  conductor  were  in  the  place  of  action, 
and  then  the  magnetic  force  developed,  it  would  change  in  form 
and  be  prolonged  axially,  becoming  an  oblong  spheroid ;  whereas 
if  such  a  sphere  of  diamagnetic  matter  were  placed  there,  it 
would  be  extended  in  the  equatorial  direction  and  become  an 
oblate  spheroid. 

2814.  The  mutual  action  of  two  portions  of  paramagnetic 
matter,  when  they  are  both  in  such  a  field  of  equal  magnetic 
force,  may  be  anticipated  from  the  principles  (2807-  2830.),  or 
from  the  corresponding  facts,  which  are  generally  known.  Two 
spheres  of  iron,  if  retained  in  the  same  equatorial  plane,  repel 
each  other  strongly ;  but  as  they  are  allowed  to  depart  out  of 
that  plane,  they  first  lose  their  mutual  repulsive  force  and  then 
attract  each  other,  and  that  they  do  most  powerfully  when  in  an 
axial  direction. 

2815,  With  diamagnetic  bodies  the  mutual  action  is  more 
difficult  to  determine,  because  of  the  comparative  lowness  of 
their  condition.    I  therefore  resorted  to  the  expedient,  before 
described,  of  using  a  saturated  solution  of  protosulphate  of  iron 
as  the  medium  occupying  the  field  of  equal  magnetic  force,  and 
employing  two  cylinders  of  phosphorus,  about  an  inch  long  and 
half  an  inch  in  diameter,  as  the  diamagnetic  bodies.    One  of 
these  was  suspended  at  the  end  of  a  lever,  which  was  itself 
suspended  by  cocoon-silk,  so  as  to  have  extremely  free  motion, 
and  the  adjustments  were  such,  that  when  the  phosphorus  cy- 
linder was  in  the  middle  of  the  magnetic  field,  it  was  free  to 
move  equatorially  or  across  the  lines  of  magnetic  force ;  it  how- 
ever had  no  tendency  to  do  so  under  the  influence  of  the  magnetic 
force.   The  other  cylinder  was  attached  to  a  copper  wire  handle, 
and  could  be  placed  in  a  fixed  position  on  either  side  of  the 
former  cylinder;  it  was  therefore  adjusted  close  by  the  side  of 
it,  and  the  two  retained  together,  until  all  disturbance  from 
motion  of  the  fluid  or  of  the  air  had  ceased;  then  the  retaming 
body  was  removed,  the  two  phosphorus  cyhnders  still  keepmg 
their  places ;  finally,  the  magnetic  power  was  brought  into  ac- 
tion, and  immediately  the  moveable  cylinder  separated  slowly 
from  the  fixed  one  and  passed  to  a  distance.    If  brought  back 
an-ain  whilst  the  magnet  was  active,  when  left  at  hberty  it  receded ; 


Oct.  1850.] 


Conduction  polarity. 


207 


but  if  restored  to  close  vicinity,  when  the  magnetic  force  was 
away,  it  retained  that  situation.  The  effect  took  place  either  in 
the  one  direction  or  the  other,  according  as  the  fixed  cylinder 
was  on  this  or  that  side  of  the  moving  one ;  but  the  motion 
was  in  both  cases  across  the  lines  of  magnetic  force,  and  was 
indeed  mechanically  and  purposely  limited  to  that  direction  by 
the  mode  of  suspension.  When  two  bismuth  balls  were  placed, 
in  respect  of  each  other,  in  the  direction  of  the  magnetic  axis,  so 
that  one  might  move,  but  only  in  the  direction  of  that  axis,  its 
place  was  not  sensibly  affected  by  the  other ;  the  tendency  of 
the  free  one  to  go  to  the  middle  of  the  field  (2812.)  overpowered 
any  other  tendency  that  might  really  exist.  _ 

2816.  Thus  two  diamagnetic  bodies,  when  in  the  magnetic 
field,  do  truly  affect  each  other ;  but  the  result  is  not  opposed  in 
its  direction  to  that  of  paramagnetic  bodies,  being  in  both  cases 
a  separation  of  the  substances  from  each  other. 

28 17.  The  comparison  of  the  action  of  para-  and  diamagnetic 
bodies  on  each  other,  was  completed  by  using  water  as  the  me- 
dium in  a  field  of  equal  magnetic  force,  and  suspending  a  piece 
of  phosphorus  from  the  torsion  balance.  When  the  magnetic 
power  was  on,  this  phosphorus  was  repelled  equatorially,  as 
before,  by  another  piece  of  phosphorus,  but  it  was  attracted  by 
a  tube  filled  with  a  saturated  solution  of  protosulphate  of  iron ; 
so  paramagnetic  and  diamagnetic  bodies  attract  each  other  equa- 
torially in  a  mean  medium,  but  each  repels  bodies  of  its  own 
kind  (2831.). 

^  ii.  Conduction  polarity . 

2818.  Having  thus  considered  briefly  the  effects  which  the 
disturbance  of  the  lines  of  force,  by  the  presence  of  paramag- 
netic and  diamagnetic  bodies,  is  competent  to  produce  (280/.  &c.), 
I  will  ask  attention  to  that  which  may  be  considered  as  their 
polarity :  not  wishing  by  the  term  to  indicate  any  internal  con- 
dition of  the  substances  or  their  particles,  but  the  condition  of 
the  mass  as  a  whole,  in  respect  of  the  state  into  which  it  is 
brought  by  its  own  disturbance  of  the  lines  of  magnetic  force ; 
and  that,  both  in  regard  to  its  condition  with  respect  to  other 
bodies  similarly  affected ;  and  also  in  regard  to  differences  exist- 
ing in  different  parts  of  its  own  mass.  Such  a  condition  con- 
cerns what  may  be  called  conduction  polarity.  Bodies  in  free 
space,  when  under  magnetic  action,  will  possess  it  in  its  simplest 


208 


Magnetic  conduction  polarity .    [Series  XXVI. 


condition ;  but  bodies  immersed  in  other  media  will  also  possess 
it  under  more  complicated  forms,  and  its  amount  may  then  be 
varied,  being  reversed  or  increased,  or  diminished  to  a  very 
large  extent. 

2819.  Taking  the  simplest  case  of  paramagnetic  polarity,  or 
that  presented  in  fig.  1  (2807.),  it  consists  in  a  convergence  of 
the  lines  of  magnetic  force  on  to  two  opposed  parts  of  the  body, 
which  are  to  each  other  in  the  direction  of  the  magnetic  axis. 
The  difference  in  character  of  the  two  poles  at  these  parts  is 
very  great,  being  that  which  is  due  to  the  known  difference  of 
quality  in  the  two  opposite  directions  of  the  line  of  magnetic 
force.  Whether  pojar  attraction  or  repulsion  exists  amongst 
paramagnetic  bodies,  when  they  present  mere  cases  of  conduc- 
tion (as  oxygen,  for  instance),  is  not  yet  certain  (2827.),  but  it 
probably  does ;  and  if  so,  will  doubtless  be  consistent  with  the 
attraction  and  repulsion  of  magnets  having  correspondent  poles. 

2820.  When  we  consider  the  conduction  polarity  of  a  dia- 
magnetic  body,  matters  appear  altogether  different.  It  has  not 
a  polarity  like  that  of  a  paramagnetic  substance,  or  one  the  mere 
reverse  (in  name  or  direction  of  the  lines  of  force)  of  such  a 
substance,  as  I,  Weber  and  others  have  at  times  assumed  (2640.), 
but  a  state  of  its  own  altogether  special.  Its  polarity  consists 
of  a  divergence  of  the  lines  of  power  on  to,  or  a  convergence 
from  the  parts,  which  being  opposite,  are  in  the  direction  of  the 
magnetic  axis ;  so  that  these  poles,  having  the  same  general  and 
opposite  relations  to  each  other,  which  correspond  to  the  dif- 
ferences in  the  poles  of  paramagnetic  bodies,  have  still,  under 
the  circumstances,  that  striking  contrast  and  difference  from  the 
polarity  of  the  latter  bodies  which  is  given  by  convergence  and 
divergence  of  the  lines  of  force. 

2821.  Let  fig.  3 
represent  a  limited 
magnetic  field  with  a 
paramagnetic  body 
P,  and  a  diamag- 
netic  body  D,  in  it, 
and  let  N  and  S  re- 
present thctwo  walls 
of  iron  associated  with  the  magnet  (2465.)  which  form  its  boun- 
dary, we  shall  then  be  able  to  obtain  a  clear  idea  of  the  direction 


Fig.  3. 


Oct.  1850.]    Magnetic  conduction — conduction  polarity .  209 

of  the  lines  of  magnetic  force  in  the  field.  Now  the  two  bodies,  P 
and  D,  cannot  be  represented  by  supposing  merely  that  they  have 
the  same  polarities  in  opposite  directions.  The  1  polarity  of  P 
is  importantly  unlike  the  3  polarity  of  D ;  but  if  D  be  considered 
as  having  the  reverse  polarities  of  P,  then  the  one  polarity  of  P 
should  be  like  the  4  polarity  of  D,  whereas  it  is  more  unlike  to 
that  than  to  the  3  polarity  of  D,  or  even  to  its  own  2  polarity. 

2822.  There  are  therefore  two  essential  differences  in  the  na- 
ture of  the  polarities  dependent  on  conduction,  the  difference  in 
the  direction  of  the  lines  of  force  abutting  on  the  polar  surfaces, 
when  the  comparison  is  with  a  m.agnet  reversed,  and  the  dif- 
ference of  convergence  and  divergence  of  these  lines,  when  com- 
pared with  a  magnet  not  reversed;  and  h^nce  a  diamagnetic 
body  is  not  in  that  condition  of  polarity  which  may  be  repre- 
sented by  turning  a  paramagnetic  body  end  for  end,  while  it 
retains  its  magnetic  state. 

2823.  Diamagnetic  bodies  in  media  more  diamagnetic  than 
themselves,  would  have  the  polar  condition  of  paramagnetic 
bodies  (2819.) ;  and  in  like  manner  paramagnetic  conductors 
in  media  more  paramagnetic  than  themselves,  would  have  the 
polarity  of  diamagnetic  bodies. 

2824.  Besides  these  differences  the  bodies  must  have  an 
equatorial  condition,  which,  in  the  two  classes  of  conductors, 
would  be  able  to  produce  corresponding  effects.  The  whole  of 
the  equatorial  part  of  P  (fig.  3)  is  alike  in  polar  relation  to  the  body 
P,  or  to  the  lines  of  force  in  the  surrounding  space ;  and  there 
is  a  like  correspondence  in  the  equatorial  parts  of  D,  either  to 
itself  or  to  space ;  but  these  parts  in  P  or  in  D  differ  in  intensity 
of  power  one  from  the  other,  and  both  from  the  general  inten- 
sity of  the  space.  Stich  equatorial  conditions  must,  I  think, 
exist  as  a  consequence  of  the  definite  character  of  any  given 
section  of  the  magnetic  field  (2809.). 

2825.  Though  the  experimental  results  of  these  polarities  are 
not  absent,  still  they  are  not  very  evident  or  capable  of  being 
embodied  in  many  striking  forms ;  and  that  because  of  the  ex- 
treme weakness  of  the  forces  brought  into  play,  as  compared 
with  those  larger  forces  exhibited  in  the  mutual  action  of  mag- 
nets. Hence  it  is,  that  the  many  attempts  to  show  a  polarity  in 
bismuth  have  either  failed,  or  other  phaenomena  have  been  mis- 
taken for  those  properly  referable  to  such  a  cause.    The  highest, 

VOL.  in.  p 


210 


Magnetic  conduction.        [Series  XXVI. 


Fig.  4. 


and  therefore  the  most  dehcate,  test  of  polarity  we  possess,  is  in 
the  subjection  of  the  polar  body  to  the  line  of  direction  of  mag- 
netic forces  of  a  very  high  degree,  when  developed  around  it ; 
and  hence  it  is,  that  the  pointing  of  a  substance  between  the 
poles  of  a  powerful  magnet  is  continually  referred  to  for  such 
a  purpose.  It  would  be,  and  is  utterly  in  vain  to  look  for  any 
mutual  action  between  the  poles  of  two  weak  paramagnetic  or 
diamagnetic  conductors  in  many  cases,  when  the  action  of  these 
same  poles  is  abundantly  manifest  in  their  relation  to  the  almost 
infinitely  stronger  poles  of  a  powerful  horseshoe  or  electro- 
magnet. 

2826.  I  took  a  tube  a  (fig.  4),  filled  with  a  saturated 
solution  of  sulphato^f  cobalt,  and  suspended  it  between 
the  poles  of  the  great  electro-magnet ;  it  set  readily  and 
well.  Another  tube,  b,  was  then  filled  with  a  saturated 
solution  of  sulphate  of  iron,  and  being  associated  with 
the  S  pole  of  the  magnet,  was  brought  near  the  cobalt 
tube  in  the  manner  shown,  but  not  the  slightest  effect 
on  the  position  of  a  was  observable.  The  tube  b  was 
changed  into  the  position  c,  to  double  any  effect  that 
might  be  present,  but  no  trace  of  mutual  action  between  the 
poles  of  a  and  b  was  visible  (2819.). 

2827.  To  increase  the  effect,  the  magnetic  solution  tube 
was  suspended  in  water,  as  a  good  diamagnetic 
medium,  between  flat-faced  poles  (fig.  5).  It 
pointed  well.  Two  bottles  of  saturated  solution 
of  sulphate  of  iron  were  placed  at  d  and  e,  but 
they  did  not  alter  the  position  of  a;  being  re- 
moved into  the  positions  /  and  g,  neither  was 
any  sensible  alteration  of  the  position  of  a  pro- 
duced. I  made  the  same  kind  of  experiment 
with  an  air-tube  in  water,  in  which  case  it  points 
axially  (2406.),  with  the  same  negative  result. 
I  do  not  mean  to  assert  that  there  was  abso- 
lutely no  effect  produced  in  these  cases  (2819.) ; 
but  if  any,  it  must  have  been  inappreciably 
small,  and  shows  how  unfit  such  means  are  to  compare  with 
those  which  are  supplied  by  the  pointing  of  a  body  when  under 
the  influence  of  powerful  magnets.  If  polarity  cannot  be  found 
by  these  methods  in  paramagnetic  bodies  so  strongly  influential 


Oct.  1850.]  Conduction  polarity .  211 

as  saturated  solution  of  iron,  nickel  or  cobalt,  it  can  hardly  be 
expected  to  manifest  itself  by  analogous  actions  in  the  much 
weaker  cases  of  diamagnetic  substances. 


2828.  When  a  spherical  paramagnetic  conductor  is  placed 
midway  in  a  field  of  equal  magnetic  force,  it  occupies  a  place  of 
unstable  equilibrium,  from  which,  if  it  be  displaced  ever  so  little, 
it  will  continue  to  move  until  it  has  gained  the  iron  boundary 
walls  of  the  field  (2465.  2810.)  ;  this  is  a  consequence  of  its 
particular  polar  condition.  If  the  sphere  were  free  to  change  its 
form,  it  would  elongate  in  the  direction  of  the  magnetic  axis ;  or 
if  it  were  a  solid  of  an  elongated  form,  it  would  point  axially, 
both  consequences  of  its  polar  condition  (2811.). 

2829.  So  also  in  the  case  of  diamagnetic  bodies,  their  peculiar 
condition  of  polarity  is  shown  by  corresponding  facts,  namely, 
by  a  spherical  portion  having  its  place  of  stable  equilibrium  in 
the  middle  of  the  magnetic  field  (2812.),  by  a  fluid  portion  tend- 
ing to  expand  equatorially  and  become  an  oblate  spheroid 
(2813.),  and  by  the  equatorial  pointing  of  an  elongated  portion 
(2812.).  If  pointed  magnetic  poles  are  used,  then  the  efiects 
are  very  much  stronger,  but  are  exactly  the  same  in  kind,  and 
dependent  upon  the  same  causes  and  polar  conditions. 

2830.  There  are  another  set  of  efiects  produced,  which  are 
either  the  results  of  the  axial  polarity  just  referred  to,  or  else 
may  be  considered  as  consequences  of  the  condition  of  the 
equatorial  parts  of  the  conductors  (2824.).  Two  balls  of  iron, 
in  a  field  of  equal  force,  if  retained  in  a  plane  at  right  angles  to 
the  line  of  force,  i.  e.  with  their  equatorial  parts  in  juxtaposition, 
separate  from  each  other  with  considerable  power  (2814.),  and 
the  probability  is  that  two  infinitely  weaker  bodies  of  the  para- 
magnetic class  would  separate  in  like  manner.  Two  portions  of 
phosphorus,  being  a  diamagnetic  substance,  have  been  found 
also  to  separate  under  the  same  circumstances  (2815.). 

2831.  The  motions  here  are  of  the  same  kind,  whereas  they 
might  have  been  expected  to  be  the  reverse  (2816.)  of  each  other ; 
still  they  are  perfectly  consistent.  The  diamagnetics  ought  to 
separate,  for  the  field  is  stronger  in  lines  of  magnetic  force 
between  them  than  on  the  outsides,  as  may  easily  be  seen  by 
considering  the  two  spheres  D  D  in  fig.  6 ;  and  therefore  this 

p  2 


212 


Magnetic  conduction.       [Series  XXVI. 


motion  is  consistent,  and  is  in  accordance  generally  with  the 
opening  or  set  equatorially,  eitlier  of  separate  portions  or  of  a 
continuous  mass-  of  such  substances  (282y.),  in  their  tendency 

Fig.  6. 


to  go  from  stronger  to  M-eaker  places  of  action.  On  the  other 
hand,  the  two  balls  of  iron,  P  P,  have  weaker  lines  of  force 
between  them  than  on  the  outside ;  and  as  their  tendency  is  to 
pass  from  weaker  to  stronger  places  of  action,  they  also  sepa- 
rate to  fulfil  the  requisite  condition  of  equilibrium  of  forces. 
Finally,  a  paramagnetic  and  a  diamagnetic  body  attract  each 
other  (28170;  ^'^d  they  ought  to  do  so,  for  the  diamagnetic 
body  finds  a  place  of  weaker  action  towards  the  paramagnetic 
body,  and  the  paramagnetic  substance  finds  a  place  of  stronger 
action  in  the  vicinity  of  the  diamagnetic  body,  D  P,  fig.  6. 

2832.  I  have  frequently  spoken  of  iron  in  illustration  of  the 
action  of  paramagnetic  conductors,  and  considered  the  polarity 
which  it  acquires  as  the  same  with  that  of  these  conductors ; 
but  I  must  now  make  clear  a  distinction,  which  exists  in  my 
mind,  with  regard  to  the  polarity  of  a  magnet,  and  the  polarity, 
as  1  have  called  it,  due  to  mere  conduction.  This  distinction 
has  an  important  influence  in  the  case  of  iron.  A  permanent 
magnet  has  a  polarity  in  itself,  which  is  possessed  also  by  its 
particles ;  and  this  polarity  is  essentially  dependent  upon  the 
power  whicl)  the  magnet  inherently  possesses.  It,  as  well  as 
the  power  which  produces  it,  is  of  such  a  nature,  that  we  cannot 
conceive  a  mere  space  void  of  matter  to  possess  either  the  one 
or  the  other,  whatever  form  that  space  may  be  supposed  to  have, 
or  however  strong  the  hues  of  magnetic  force  passing  across  it. 
The  polarity  of  a  conductor  is  not  necessarily  of  this  kind ;  is 
not  due  to  a  determinate  arrangement  of  the  cause  or  source  of 
the  magnetic  action,  which  in  its  turn  overrules  and  determines 
the  special  direction  of  the  lines  of  force  (2807.) ;  but  is  simply 
a  consequence  of  the  condensation  or  expansion  of  these  lines  of 
force,  as  the  substance  under  consideration  is  more  or  less  fitted 


Oct.  1850.]  Conduction  polarity — iron. 


213 


to  convey  their  influence  onwards.  It  is  evidently  a  very  dif- 
ferent thing  to  originate  such  lines  of  power  and  determine  their 
direction  on  the  one  hand,  and  only  to  assist  or  retard  their  pro- 
gression without  any  reference  to  their  direction  on  the  other. 
Speaking  figuratively,  the  difference  may  be  compared  to  that 
of  a  voltaic  battery  and  the  conducting  wires,  or  substances, 
which  connect  its  extremities.  The  stream  of  force  passes 
through  both,  but  it  is  the  battery  which  originates  it,  and  also 
determines  its  direction ;  the  wire  is  only  a  better  or  worse  con- 
ductor, however  by  variation  of  form  or  quality  it  may  diffuse, 
condense,  or  vary  the  stream  of  power. 

2833.  If  this  distinction  be  admitted,  we  have  to  consider 
whether  iron,  when  under  the  influence  of  lines  of  magnetic 
power,  becomes  a  magnet  and  has  its  proper  polarity,  or  is  a 
mere  paramagnetic  conductor  with  conducting  powers  of  the 
highest  possible  degree.  In  the  first  place,  it  would  have  the 
real  polarity  of  the  magnet,  in  the  second  only  that  which  I 
assign  to  oxygen  and  other  conducting  bodies.  To  my  mind 
the  iron  is  a  magnet.  It  can  be  raised  as  a  source  of  lines  of 
magnetic  power  to  an  extreme  degree  of  energy  in  the  electro- 
magnet; and  though,  when  very  soft,  it  usually  loses  nearly 
all  this  power  upon  the  cessation  of  the  electric  current,  yet 
such  is  not  the  case  if  the  mass  of  metal  forms  a  continuous 
circuit  or  ring,  for  then  it  can  retain  the  force  for  hours  and 
weeks  together,  and  is  evidently  for  the  time  an  original  source 
of  power  independent  of  any  voltaic  current.  Hence  I  think 
that  the  iron  under  the  influence  of  lines  of  magnetic  power 
becomes  a  magnet ;  and  though  it  then  has  the  same  kind  of 
polarity,  as  to  direction,  as  a  mere  paramagnetic  conductor, 
subject  to  the  same  lines  of  force,  still  with  a  great  difference ; 
for  as  the  internal  particles  of  iron  become  in  a  degree  each  a 
system  producing  magnetism,  so  their  polarity  is  correlated  and 
combined  together  into  a  polar  whole,  which,  being  infinitely 
more  intense,  may  also  be  very  different  in  the  disposition  of  its 
force  in  different  parts,  to  that  equivalent  to  polarity,  which  a 
mere  conductor  possesses. 

2834.  It  appears  to  me  also  as  very  probable,  that  when  iron, 
nickel  and  cobalt,  are  heated  up  to  the  respective  temperatures 
at  which  they  lose  their  wonderful  degree  of  power  (2347.)  and 
retam  only  so  small  a  portion  of  it  as  to  require  the  most  sen- 


214 


Magnetic  conduction — polarity.    [Series  XXVI. 


sible  test  to  make  it  manifest  (2343.),  they  then  have  passed  into 
the  condition  of  paramagnetic  conductors,  have  lost  all  ability 
to  acquire  that  state  of  internal  polarity  they  could  assume  as 
magnets,  and  now  have  no  other  polarity  than  that  which  belongs 
to  them  as  masses  of  paramagnetic  matter  (2819.).  It  is  also 
probable  that  in  many  states  of  combination  these  metals  may 
take  up  the  mere  conducting  state ;  for  instance,  that  whilst  in 
the  protoxide,  iron  may  constitute  a  magnet,  in  the  peroxide  it 
is  only  a  conductor ;  and  in  this  respect  it  is  not  a  little  curious 
to  find  oxygen,  which  as  a  gas  is  a  paramagnetic  body  (2782.), 
reducing  iron  down  to,  and  indeed  far  below  its  own  condition, 
weight  for  weight.  In  their  various  salts  also  and  solutions, 
these  metals  may,  in  conjunction  with  the  combined  matter,  be 
acting  only  as  conductors. 

2835.  Perhaps  I  ought  not  to  have  called  the  condition  of 
concentration  or  expansion  of  the  lines  of  magnetic  force  in  the 
bodies  acting  as  conductors,  a  polarity ;  inasmuch  as  true  mag- 
netic polarity  depends  essentially  and  entirely  on  the  direction 
of  the  line  of  force,  and  not  on  any  mere  compression  or  diver- 
gence of  these  lines.  I  have  done  so  only  that  I  might  point 
with  the  more  facility  to  facts  and  views  that  have  heretofore 
been  associated  with  some  supposed  polarity  in  the  bodies  which, 
whether  paramagnetic  or  diamagnetic,  I  have  been  considering 
as  mere  conductors,  and  I  hope  that  no  mistake  of  my  meaning 
will  arise  in  consequence.  I  have  already  asked  for  such  liberty 
in  the  use  of  phrases  (lines  of  force,  conducting  power,  &c.) 
(2149.  2797.)  as  may,  for  the  time,  set  me  free  from  the  bondage 
of  preconceived  notions ;  these  are,  for  that  very  reason,  exceed- 
ingly  useful,  provided  they  are  for  the  time  sufficiently  restricted 
in  their  meaning,  and  do  not  admit  of  any  hurtful  looseness  or 
inaccuracy  in  the  representation  of  facts. 

^  iii.  Magnecrystallic  conduction^. 

2836.  The  beautiful  researches  of  Pliicker  in  relation  to  mag- 
neoptic  phsenomena  cannot  have  been  forgotten,  and  I  hope  that 
my  own  experiments  on  magnecrystallic  results  (2454,  &c.)  are 

'  I  must  refer  here  to  the  important  paper  by  MM.  Tyndall  and  H.  Kno- 
blauch on  this  subject  in  the  Philosophical  Magazine,  1850,  vol.  xxxvii.  p.  1. 
M.  F.— January  6,  1851. 


Oct.  1850.]       MagnecrystaUic  conduction. 


215 


remembered  in  conjunction  with  his ;  the  phaenomena  described 
by  us  ai-e,  as  I  beheve,  due  to  a  common  cause,  and  are  the  same 
in  kind ;  and  as  far  as  they  are  presented  by  pure  transparent 
bodies,  are  I  think  brought  by  Pliicker  into  a  proper  relation  to 
the  positive  and  negative  optic  axis  of  such  bodies  ^  In  these 
cases  a  crystalline  body  sets  powerfully,  or  takes  up  a  particular 
position  when  placed  in  a  field  of  magnetic  force  (2464.  2479. 
2550.),  M'ithout  reference  to  its  paramagnetic  or  diamagnetic 
character  (2562.),  and  also  without  assuming  any  state  which  it 
can  on  its  removal  bring  away  with  it  (2504.). 

2837.  If  the  idea  of  conduction  be  applied  to  these  mag- 
necrystallic  bodies,  it  would  seem  to  satisfy  all  that  requires  ex- 
planation in  their  special  results.  A  magnecrystallic  substance 
would  then  be  one  which  in  the  crystallized  state  could  conduct 
onwards,  or  permit  the  exertion  of  the  magnetic  force  with  more 
facility  in  one  direction  than  another ;  and  that  direction  would 
be  the  magnecrystallic  axis.  Hence,  when  in  the  magnetic  field, 
the  magnecrystallic  axis  would  be  urged  into  a  position  coinci- 
dent with  the  magnetic  axis,  by  a  force  correspondent  to  that 
diflference,  just  as  if  two  different  bodies  were  taken,  when  the 
one  with  the  greater  conducting  power  displaces  that  which  is 
weaker. 

2838.  The  eflFect  of  position  would  thus  be  accounted  for 
(2586.) ;  and  also  the  greater  aptness  for  magnetic  conduction 
in  one  direction  than  in  another  (2588.  2591.):  and,  what  appeared 
to  me  as  an  anomaly  in  the  supposition,  that  a  line  of  force  could 
have  reference  indifferently  to  any  part  of  a  plane  (2600.)  dis- 
appears. That  heat  should  take  away  this  conducting  power 
(2570.)  seemed  perfectly  consistent  with  what  we  know  of  the 
effect  of  heat  on  the  magnetic  condition  of  iron,  oxygen,  &c., 
and  also  upon  the  conducting  power  for  electricity  in  such  cases 
as  platina,  sulphuret  of  silver,  &c.  Finally,  the  assumption  did 
not  appear  inconsistent  with  the  state  which  the  body  seems  to 
assume  for  the  time  during  which  it  is  under  the  magnetic  force 
(2609.  &c.). 

2839.  But  if  such  a  view  were  correct,  it  would  appear  to 
follow  that  a  diamagnetic  body  like  bismuth  ought  to  be  less 
diamagnetic  when  its  magnecrystallic  axis  is  parallel  (as  nearly 
as  may  be)  to  the  magnetic  axis,  than  when  it  is  perpendicular 

'  Philosophical  Magazine,  1849,  vol.  xxxiv.  p.  450. 


216 


Magnecrijstallic  conduction.    [Series  XXVT. 


to  it.  In  the  two  positions  it  should  be  equivalent  to  two  sub- 
stances having  different  conducting  powers  for  magnetism,  and 
therefore,  if  submitted  to  the  differential  balance,  ought  to  pre- 
sent differential  phajnomena,  corresponding  in  kind  to  those  of 
oxygen  and  nitrogen  (2774.)?  or  phosphorus  and  bismuth,  or 
any  other  two  differing  bodies.  Though  I  have  given  certain 
results  on  a  former  occasion  which  seemed  to  bear  on  this  point 
(2551v  2552.  2553.),  they  are  not  satisfactory  in  the  present 
state  of  our  knowledge,  because  the  difference,  if  any,  would  be 
small  (2552.),  and  quickly  hidden  by  the  employment  ^of  a 
single  pointed  pole.  Other  experiments,  formerly  described 
(2554-2561.),  would  not  show  a  small  difference  in  diamagnetic 
force  (though  quite"  fitted  for  their  intended  purpose),  because 
they  were  made  with  flat-faced  poles,  and  a  field  nearly  equal  in 
magnetic  power. 

2840.  The  differential  torsion  balance  (2773.)  enabled  me  to 
return  to  this  matter  with  better  hopes  of  success.  A  con- 
sistent group  of  bismuth  crystals  was  selected  (2457.)  and  hung 
up  on  one  side  of  the  double  cone  core  (2738.),  whilst  a  cylinder 
of  flint-glass  was  opposed  to  it  on  the  other.  The  fUnt-glass 
was  to  be  a  standard  of  reference,  and  therefore  neither  its  place 
on  the  balance  nor  condition  was  altered  during  the  experiment. 
The  bismuth  group  was  placed  with  its  magnecrystallic  axis 
horizontal,  and  so  that  it  could  be  turned  in  a  horizontal  plane, 
that  the  axis  might  be  at  one  time  parallel  to  the  magnetic  axis 
(or  lines  of  force),  and  at  other  times  perpendicular  to  it,  but 
without  any  alteration  of  the  distance  of  its  centre  of  gravity 
from  the  opposed  glass  cylinder.  Hence,  having  either  one 
position  or  the  other,  it  could  still  be  compared  with  the  cylinder. 

2841.  The  magnecrystallic  axis  was  first  made  parallel  to  the 
core  or  magnetic  axis,  the  magnetic  powder  developed,  and  when 
the  diamagnetic  bodies  had  taken  their  position  of  rest  or  stable 
equilibrium,  the  place  of  the  balance  lever  was  observed  and 
recorded  by  means  of  a  ray  of  light  reflected  from  a  mirror  at- 
tached to  it.  Then  the  bismuth  was  turned  through  90°,  or 
until  its  magnecrystallic  axis  was  perpendicular  to  the  axis  of 
the  double  cone  core ;  and  now,  when  the  magnet  was  excited, 
the  place  of  the  bismuth  was  found  to  be  further  out  from  the 
core  than  before.  On  being  turned  through  90°  more,  so  as  to 
be  in  a  position  diametral  to  the  first  (2461.),  its  place  was  again 


Oct.  1850.]        Magneo'ystallic  conduction. 


217 


a  little  nearer  to  the  magnet ;  and  when  in  the  fourth  position, 
which  is  diametral  to  the  second,  then  it  was  further  out.  Thus 
the  crystallized  bismuth  proved  to  be  diamagnetic  in  different 
degrees,  according  with  certain  directions  of  its  magneci'ystallic 
axis,  being  more  diamagnetic  when  this  axis  was  perpendicular 
or  transverse  to  the  lines  of  magnetic  force,  than  when  it  was 
parallel  to  them  *  and  thus  the  expectation  founded  upon  theo- 
retical considerations  (2839.)  was  confirmed. 

2842.  I  tried  to  obtain  similar  results  with  a  cube  of  calca- 
reous spar  (2597.);  for  it  is  evident  that  if  its  optic  axis,  being 
in  a  horizontal  plane,  is  first  placed  parallel  to  the  magnetic 
axis  and  then  perpendicular  to  it,  the  body  ought  to  be  more 
diamagnetic  in  the  first  position  than  in  the  second,  inasmuch 
as  the  latter  is  the  position  which  it  takes  up  under  the  influence 
of  its  magnecrystallic  or  magneoptic  condition.  I  could  not 
however  obtain  any  distinct  results,  partly  because  its  power  is 
in  all  respects  very  inferior  to  the  bismuth,  partly  because  of  the 
present  imperfection  of  my  torsion  balance,  and  partly  because 
of  the  size  and  shape  of  the  calcareous  spar.  A  sphere  or  a 
cylinder,  having  the  optic  axis  perpendicular  to  the  axis  of  the 
cylinder,  would  be  more  correct  as  forms  of  the  substances  to  be 
tried. 


2843.  In  concluding  this' part  of  the  subject  relating  to  the 
magnetic  conducting  power,  I  will  now  refer  to  some  of  the 
cases  which  I  think  experimentally  establish  its  existence  in  the 
two  subdivisions  of  magnetic  bodies  (2805.).  The  place  and 
position  of  iron  in  a  field  of  equal  force  (2810.  2811.)  is  no  doubt 
a  result  of  the  extraordinary  power  which  this  body  has  of  trans- 
mitting the  magnetic  force  across  the  space  which  it  occupies, 
whether  the  particles  of  the  iron  be  considered  as  polar  or  not 
(2832.),  and  therefore  I  accept  the  converse  pheenomena  as  to 
place  and  position  of  a  diamagnetic  body  (2812.  2813.)  as  proof 
that  it  has  less  power  of  transmitting  the  magnetic  force  than 
the  space  it  occupies,  and  from  that  conclude  that  it  conducts 
diamagnetically  (2802.). 

2844.  The  separation  of  paramagnetic  bodies  in  the  equatorial 
direction  is  a  proof  of  the  manner  in  which,  by  their  Jaetter  con- 
duction, they  disturb  the  position  of  the  lines  of  force  in  the 
medium  around  them  (2831.).    The  separation  of  two  diamag- 


218 


Magnecrystallic  conduction.    [Series  XXVI. 


netic  bodies,  under  the  same  circumstances,  is  an  equal  proof  of 
the  manner  in  which,  by  difference  of  conducting  power,  they 
also  disturb  the  disposition  of  the  force  (2831.).  'The  equatorial 
attraction  of  a  paramagnetic  and  a  diamagnetic  body  for  each 
other,  when  they  are  in  a  medium,  which  in  conducting  power 
is  between  the  two  (2831.),  is  a  proof  not  only  of  conduction 
in  both,  but  also  of  their  reverse  condition  m  respect  of  each 
other  and  the  medium. 

2845.  The  place  of  a  crystal  of  bismuth,  either  nearer  to  or 
further  from  the  magnetic  axis  (2841.),  according  as  its  magne- 
crystallic axis  is  parallel  or  perpendicular  to  the  axial  line,  is 
also  a  case  of  the  difference  of  conducting  power,  and  therefore 
of  the  possession  of  that  power  by  the  diamagnetic  body.  Many 
other  cases  might  be  quoted  in  illustration  of  the  existence  of 
that  power  which  I  assumed  as  conducting  power  (279705  ^iid 
which  probably  nobody  may  be  inclined  to  deny.  I  will  sup- 
pose that  the  above  are  enough  to  explain  my  meaning. 

2846.  It  is  hardly  necessary  for  me  to  say  that  magnetic  con- 
duction does  not  mean  electro-conduction,  or  anything  like  it. 
The  very  best  electro-conductors,  as  silver,  gold  and  copper,  are 
below  mere  space  in  their  ability  to  favour  the  transmission  of 
magnetic  force,  so  deficient  are  they  in  what  I  have  called  mag- 
netic conduction.  There  is  a  striking  analogy  between  this 
conduction  of  magnetic  force  and  what  I  formerly  called  specific 
inductive  capacity  (1252.  &c.)  in  relation  to  static  electricity, 
which  I  hope  will  lead  to  further  development  of  the  manner  in 
which  lines  of  power  are  affected  in  bodies,  and  in  part  trans- 
mitted by  them. 

§  33.  Atmospheric  magnetism^ ^. 
%  1.  General  principles. 

2847.  It  is  to  me  an  impossible  thing  to  perceive,  that  two- 
ninths  of  the  atmosphere,  by  weight,  is  a  highly  magnetic  body, 

'  A  most  important  paper  by  Professor  Christie,  "  On  the  TJieory  of  the 
Diurnal  Variation  of  the  Magnetic  Needle,"  appears  in  the  Philosophical 
Transactions  for  1827,  p-  308.  Led  by  the  discoveries  of  Seebeck  in  therrao- 
magnetism  and  the  experiments  of  Gumming,  he  was  induced  to  search  how 

*  I  ought  to  refer  the  readers  of  my  paper  to  a  theory  of  the  cause  of  the 
daily  variations  by  M.  A.  de  la  Rive,  founded  upon  the  idea  of  thermo- 
electric currents  in  the  atmosphere  and  earth ;  it  will  be  found  in  a  memoir 


Oct.  1850.]  Atmospheric  magnetism. 


219 


subject  to  great  changes  in  its  magnetic  character,  by  variations 
in  its  physical  conditions  of  temperature  and  condensation  or 
rarefaction  (2780.),  and  at  the  same  time  subject  to  these  phy- 

far  the  idea  of  thermo-currents  or  thermo-magnetic  polarity  would  apply  to 
the  natural  phaenomena,  and  concludes  (p.  327),  that,  admitting  that  the  earth 
a7id  the  atmosphere  are  substances  in  which  such  action  can  under  any  circum- 
stances take  place,  these  experiments  would  indicate  that  any  portion  of  the 
earthbounded  by  parallel  planes  with  the  atmosphere  surrounding  it,  would  become 
similarly  polarized  if  one  part  were  more  heated  than  another.  Thus  consider- 
ing alone  the  equatorial  regions  of  the  earth,  we  should  have  two  magnetic  poles 
on  the  northern  side,  and  on  the  southern  side  two  poles  similarly  posited ;  the 
poles  of  different  names  being  opposed  to  each  other  on  the  contrary  sides  of  the 
equator.  . 

entitled  '  On  the  Diurnal  Variation  of  the  Magnetic  Needle.'  Annales  de 
Chimie,  1849,  xxv.  p.  310. 

A  friend  has  recently  called  my  attention  to  an  observation  by  M.  E.  Bec- 
querel,  which  has  reference  to  the  present  subject,  and  is  in  the  following 
words.    "  If  we  reflect  that  the  earth  is  encompassed  by  a  mass  of  air,  equi- 
valent in  weight  to  a  layer  of  mercury  of  30  inches,  we  may  inquire  whether 
such  a  mass  of  magnetic  gas,  continually  agitated  and  submitted  to  the  regular 
and  irregular  variations  of  pressure  and  temperature,  does  not  intervene  in  some 
of  the  phsenomena  dependent  on  terrestrial  magnetism.    If  vie  calculate  in  fact 
what  is  the  magnetic  force  of  this  fluid  mass,  we  find  that  it  is  equivalent  to 
an  immense  plate  of  iron,  of  a  thickness  a  Httle  more  than  i^^th  of  a  millimetre 
of  diameter  (?),  and  which  covers  the  whole  surface  of  the  globe."  This 
passage  is  at  pp.  341,  342  of  vol.  xxviii.  Annales  de  Chimie,  1850,  being 
contained  in  an  excellent  memoir,  in  which  the  author  has  well  worked  out 
those  differential  actions  of  different  media,  which  I  developed  generally /we 
years  ago  :— Experimental  Researches,  2357.  2361.  2406.  2414.  2423.  &c.  By 
such  means  he  has  rediscovered  the  magnetic  character  of  oxygen  and  taken 
measurements  of  its  force,  being  evidently  unacquainted  with  the  account  that 
I  gave  of  this  substance  in  relation  to  nitrogen  and  other  gases  three  years  ago, 
in  a  letter  published  in  the  Philosophical  Magazine  for  1847,  vol.  xxxi.  p.  401, 
and  also  in  Poggendorff's  Annalen  and  elsewhere; — hence  the  observations 
above.    I  cannot  wonder  at  this,  for  I  myself  was  not  aware  of  M.  E.  Bec- 
querel's  paper  until  very  lately.    In  my  letter  of  1847,  I  speak  of  oxygen  as 
being  magnetic  in  common  air,  p.  410;  in  carbonic  acid,  p.  414;  in  coal  gas, 
p.  415  ;  in  hydrogen,  p.  415,  its  power  then  being  equal  to  its  gravity.    I  say 
that  air  owes  its  place  to  the  oxygen  and  nitrogen  in  it,  p.  416,  and  tried  to 
separate  these  constituents  by  attracting  the  oxygen  and  repelling  the  nitrogen. 
At  the  end  of  the  paper  I  hesitate  in  deciding  where  the  true  zero  between  mag- 
netic and  diamagnetic  bodies  is  to  be  placed,  and  refer  to  the  atmosphere  as 
being  liable  to  affections  under  the  magnetic  influence  of  the  earth.    It  was 
these  old  results  which  led  me  on  to  the  present  researches,  M.  F.— Nov.  28, 

1850. 


220 


Atmospheric  magnetism,    [Series  XXVI. 


sical  changes  in  a  high  degree,  by  annual  and  diurnal  variations, 
in  its  relation  to  the  sun,  without  being  persuaded  that  it  must 
have  much  to  do  with  the  disposition  of  the  magnetic  forces  upon 
the  surface  of  the  earth  (27^6.),  and  may  perhaps  account  for  a 
large  part  of  the  annual,  diurnal  and  irregular  variations,  for 
short  periods,  which  are  found  to  occur  in  relation  to  that  power. 
I  cannot  pretend  to  discuss  this  great  question  with  much  un- 
derstanding, seeing  that  I  have  very  little  of  that  special  know- 
ledge which  has  been  accumulated  by  the  exertions  of  the  great 
and  distinguished  labourers,  Humboldt,  Hansteen,  Arago,  Gauss, 
Sabine,  and  many  others,  who  have  wrought  so  zealously  at  ter- 
restrial magnetism  over  the  surface  of  the  whole  earth.  But  as 
it  has  fallen  to  my  lot  to  introduce  certain  fundamental  physical 
facts,  and  as  I  have  naturally  thought  much  upon  the  general 
principles  which  tend  to  establish  their  relation  to  the  magnetic 
actions  of  the  atmosphere,  I  may  be  allowed  to  state  these  prin- 
ciples as  well  as  I  can,  that  others  may  be  placed  in  possession 
of  the  subject.  If  the  principles  are  right,  they  will  soon  find 
their  special  application  to  magnetic  phaenomena  as  they  occur 
at  various  parts  of  the  globe. 

2848.  The  earth  presents  us  with  a  spheroidal  body,  which, 
consisting  of  both  paramagnetic  and  diaraagnetic  substances, 
disposed  with  much  irregularity  as  regards  its  large  divisions  of 
earth  and  ocean,  are  also  equally  irregularly  disposed  and  inter- 
mingled in  its  smaller  portions.  Nevertheless  it  is,  on  the  whole, 
a  magnet,  and,  as  far  as  we  at  this  moment  are  concerned,  an 
original  source  of  that  power.  And  though  we  cannot  conceive 
at  present  that  all  the  particles  of  the  earth  contribute,  as  sources, 
to  its  magnetism,  inasmuch  as  many  of  them  are  diamagnetic, 
and  many  non-conductors  of  electric  currents,  yet  it  is  difficult 
to  say  that  any  large  portion  is  not  concerned  in  the  production 
of  the  force ;  hereafter  it  may  be  necessary,  perhaps,  to  consider 
certain  parts  as  mere  conductors,  i.  e.  as  parts  merely  permeated 
by  the  lines  of  force,  originating  elsewhere,  but  for  the  present 
the  whole  may  be  assumed,  according  to  the  theory  of  Gauss,  as 
a  mighty  compound  magnet. 

2849.  The  magnetic  force  of  this  great  system  is  disposed 
with  a  certain  degree  of  regularity.  We  have  the  opportunity  of 
recognising  it  only  as  it  is  exhibited  in  one  shell  or  surface,  which, 
being  very  in-egular  in  form,  is  always  the  same  to  us,  for  we 


Oct.  1850.]  Atmosphei'ic  magnetism. 


221 


rarely,  if  ever,  pass  out  of  it ;  or  if  we  do,  as  in  a  balloon,  only 
to  an  insensible  extent.  This  is  the  surface  of  the  earth  and 
water  of  our  planet.  The  magnetic  lines  of  force  which  pass  in 
or  across  this  surface  are  made  knowj^  to  us,  as  respects  their 
direction  and  intensity,  by  their  action  on  small  standard  mag- 
nets ;  but  their  average  course  or  their  temporary  variations 
beloiv  or  above,  i.  e.  in  the  air  above,  or  the  earth  beneath,  are 
only  dimly  indicated  by  variations  of  the  force  at  the  surface  of 
the  earth,  and  these  variations  are  so  limited  in  their  information, 
that  they  do  not  tell  us  whether  the  cause  is  above  or  below. 

2850.  The  lines  of  force  issue  from  the  earth  in  the  northern 
and  southern  parts  with  different  but  corresponding  degrees  of 
inclination,  and  incline  to  and  coalesce  with  each  other  over  the 
equatorial  parts.  Their  general  disposition  is  represented  by  the 
system,  which  emanates  from  a  globe  having  within  one  or  two 
short  magnets  adjusted  in  relation  to  the  axis.  There  seems 
reason  to  believe,  from  the  analogy  of  such  globes  to  the  earth, 
that  the  lines  of  magnetic  force  which  proceed  from  the  earth 
return  to  it;  but  in  their  circuitous  course  they  may  extend 
through  space  to  a  distance  of  many  diameters  of  the  earth,  to 
tens  of  thousands  of  miles.  Messrs.  Gay-Lussac  and  Biot,  in 
their  ascent  in  a  balloon,  perceived  some  indication  of  a  dimi- 
nution in  the  intensity  of  the  magnetic  force  at  a  height  of  about 
four  miles  from  the  surface ;  but  we  shall  shortly  perceive  that 
they  might  be  at  the  time  in  the  midst  of  influences  sufficient 
to  account  for  all  the  effect,  so  that  none  of  it  might  be  occa- 
sioned by  removal  from  the  earth  as  a  magnet.  The  increase  of 
the  intensity  of  the  magnetic  force,  as  we  proceed  from  the 
equator  towards  the  poles,  accords  with  the  idea  of  the  enor- 
mous extension  of  this  power. 

2851.  These  lines  proceed  through  space  with  a  certain  de- 
gree of  facility,  of  which  a  general  idea  may  be  gained  from 
ordinary  knowledge,  or  from  experiments  and  observations  for- 
merly made  (2787.).  Whether  there  are  any  circumstances 
which  can  affect  their  passage  through  mere  space,  and  so  cause 
variations  in  their  condition;  whether  variations  in  what  has 
been  called  the  temperature  of  space  could,  if  they  occurred, 
alter  its  power  of  transmitting  the  magnetic  influence,  are  ques- 
tions which  cannot  be  answered  at  present,  although  the  latter 
does  not  seem  to  be  entirely  beyond  the  reach  of  experiment. 


222  Atmospheric  magnetism.       [Series  XXVI. 

2852.  This  space  forms  the  great  abyss  into  which  such  Unes 
of  force  as  we  are  able  to  take  cognizance  of  by  our  observing 
instruments,  which  issue  from  the  earth,  proceed,  at  least  at  all 
parts  of  the  globe  where  there  is  a  sensible  dip.  But,  as  it  were, 
between  the  earth  and  this  space,  there  is  interposed  the  atmo- 
sphere; which,  however  considerable  we  may  estimate  it  in 
height,  is  so  small  when  compared  to  the  size  of  the  earth,  or  to 
the  extent  of  space  beyond  it  into  which  the  lines  of  force  pass, 
that  the  idea  of  its  being  a  changeable,  active  something  inter- 
posed between  two  systems  far  more  extensive  and  steady  in  their 
nature  and  condition,  will  not  lead  to  any  serious  error.  It  is  at 
the  bottom  of  this  atmosphere  that  we  live  and  make  all  our 
inquiries,  whether  by  observation  or  experiment. 

2853.  The  atmosphere  consists,  as  far  as  we  are  concerned  at 
present,  of  four  volumes  of  nitrogen  and  one  volume  of  oxygen, 
or  by  weight,  of  three  and  a  half  parts  of  the  former  and  one 
part  of  the  latter.  These  substances  are  nearly  uniformly  mixed 
throughout,  so  that,  as  regards  their  manner  of  investing  the 
earth,  they  act  magnetically  as  a  single  medium  ;  nor  does  there 
seem  to  be  any  tendency  in  the  terrestrial  magnetic  forces  to 
cause  their  separation  i,  though  they  differ  very  strikingly  in 
their  constitution  as  regards  this  power. 

2854.  The  nitrogen  of  the  air  does  not  appear  to  be  either 
paramagnetic  or  diamagnetic ;  if  removed  from  zero,  in  either 
of  these  respects,  it  is  only  to  a  very  small  extent  (2783.  2784.). 
Whether  dense  or  rare,  it  has  apparently  the  same  relation  to 
and  equality  with  space,  as  far  as  the  present  means  of  obser- 
vation have  proceeded.  As  respects  the  other  element  of  change, 
namely,  temperature,  I  concluded,  from  former  imperfect  expe- 
riments 2,  that  nitrogen  became  more  diamagnetic  when  heated 
than  before ;  but  as  it  was  then  mixed  with  the  oxygen  of  the  air, 
and  the  results  were  mingled  together,  I  have,  for  the  purposes 
of  the  present  research,  repeated  the  experiments  far  more  care- 

^"^^28*55  A  small  helix  of  platinum  wire,  fixed  at  the  end  of 
thicker  copper  wires,  could  be  placed  in  any  position  beneath 
the  poles  of  the  great  electro-magnet,  and  bemg  ignited  by  a 
voltaic  battery,  served  to  raise  the  temperature  of  the  gas  around 
it.  The  magnetic  poles  were  raised ;  were  terminated  by  hemi- 
"  1  Philosophical  Magazine,  1847,  vol.  xxxi.  p.  416.        '  Ibid.  p.  418. 


Oct.  1850.]    Effect  of  heat  on  air — carbonic  acid  gas.  223 

spheres  of  soft  iron  0*76  of  an  inch  in  diameter  and  0-2  of  an 
inch  apart ;  and  were  covered  by  a  glass  shade,  resting  upon  a 
thick  flat  bed  of  vulcanized  caoutchouc.  A  tube  passed  through 
the  bed,  rising  up  to  the  top  of  the  shade,  by  which  any  required 
gas  could  be  introduced.  A  very  thin  plate  of  mica,  about  3 
inches  square,  was  covered  with  an  attenuated  coat  of  wax  on 
the  upper  side,  and  fixed  horizontally  over  the  magnetic  poles 
within  the  shade.  The  small  platinum  helix  was  so  placed  as  to 
be  beneath  the  space,  between  the  poles,  and  a  little  on  one  side 
of  the  axial  line,  so  that  a  current  of  hot  air  rising  upwards  from 
it,  could  pass  to  the  mica  plate,  and  by  melting  the  wax  show 
where  it  came  against  the  mica. 

2856.  All  acted  exceedingly  well,  air  being  in  the  glass  shade. 
When  there  was  no  magnetic  power  on,  the  hot  air  from  the 
ignited  helix  rose  perpendicularly,  and  melted  a  neat  round  por- 
tion of  the  wax,  showing  the  place  of  the  current  under  natural 
circumstances ;  but  when  the  magnet  was  thrown  into  action, 
then  the  wax  on  the  mica  remained  unchanged,  the  hot  air 
being  thrown  so  far  away  from  the  axial  line,  and  so  cooled  by 
its  forcible  mixture  with  the  neighbouring  air,  as  to  be  unable 
to  melt  a  spot  of  wax  anywhere.  The  moment  the  magnetic 
power  was  suspended,  the  column  of  hot  air  rose  vertically  and 
regained  its  original  position. 

2857-  Carbonic  acid  gas  was  then  sent  into  the  shade,  until 
twice  as  much  as  the  contents  of  the  shade  had  passed  through 
the  pipe  (2855.)  ;  but  as  it  was  heavy  and  the  common  air  could 
make  its  way  out  only  at  the  bottom  of  the  shade,  there  was  no 
doubt  air  mixed  with  the  carbonic  acid,  which  at  last  remained 
about  the  poles.    The  platinum  coil  being  now  heated,  the  co- 
lumn of  hot  gas  rose  vertically,  as  before.    On  putting  on  the 
magnetic  force  it  was  deflected  from  the  axial  line,  passing  equa- 
torially,  and  melted  the  wax  about  half  an  inch  off  from  the 
former  place.    Believing  that  even  this  effect  might  be  due  to 
the  air  mingled  with  the  gas,  other  two  volumes  of  carbonic  acid 
gas  were  directed  into  and  through  the  vessel.    After  this  the 
magnetic  force  caused  much  less  deflection  of  the  rising  column. 
Two  volumes  more  of  carbonic  acid  were  sent  through,  and  now 
the  hot  current  of  gas  rose  so  nearly  vertical  that  there  was 
scarcely  any  sensible  difference  of  its  place  when  the  magnetic 
power  was  in  full  action,   or  when  it  was  entirely  absent. 


224 


Effect  of  heat  on  nitrogen.     [Series  XXVI. 


Hence  I  conclude  that  carbonic  acid  gas  is  very  little  affected  in 
its  diaraagnetic  relations  by  a  difference  of  temperature  equal 
to  that  between  natural  temperatures  and  a  full  red  heat. 

2858.  Nitrogen. — This  gas  was  prepared  by  passing  common 
air  slowly  over  burning  phosphorus,  and  after  being  washed  for 
twelve  or  fourteen  hours,  was  sent  into  the  shade  so  as  to  displace 
the  carbonic  acid.  As  it  was  lighter  than  the  latter,  it  per- 
formed that  service  very  well,  and  the  portion  remaining  in  the 
vessel  probably  contained  no  other  oxygen  or  air  than  that  it 
carried  in  with  it.  This  nitrogen  being  then  heated  by  the 
platina  coil,  was  almost  as  indifferent  to  the  magnet  as  the  car- 
bonic acid.  The  heated  column  rose  (nearly)  to  the  same  spot 
against  the  mica,  whether  the  magnetic  power  was  active  or  not. 
It  went  outwards  or  equatorially  a  very  small  degree  when  the 
magnet  was  active,  but  this  I  attributed  to  a  little  oxygen  still 
left  with  the  nitrogen;  and  indeed  nitric  oxide  gas  shows  oxygen 
in  nitrogen  so  prepared.  The  platina  coil  was  raised  to  as  high 
a  temperature  as  it  could  well  support  without  fusion,  and  yet 
there  was  only  this  -small  effect  sensible ;  hence  I  conclude  that 
hot  nitrogen  is  not  more  diamagnetic  than  cold  nitrogen,  and  that 
indeed  its  magnetic  relation  is  noways  affected  by  such  change 
of  temperature. 

2859.  I  raised  the  French  shade  (2855.)  an  inch  for  a  moment, 
and  then  instantly  placed  it  down  again ;  and  now,  on  making 
the  magnet  active  and  the  coil  hot,  there  was  so  much  effect  of 
dispersion  of  the  gas  within,  that  the  melted  spot  of  wax  ap- 
peared nearly  an  inch  outside  of  the  standard  place,  yet  only 
a  very  small  portion  of  air  or  of  oxygen  could  have  entered  the 
vessel  und^r  these  circumstances. 

2860.  The  nitrogen  of  the  air  is  therefore,  as  regards  the 
magnetic  force,  a  very  indifferent  body;  it  does  not  appear  to  be 
either  paramagnetic  or  diamagnetic;  neither  does  it  present  any 
difference  in  its  relation,  whether  it  be  dense  or  rare,  or  at  high 
or  low  temperatures.  I  formerly  found  that  the  diamagnetic 
metals,  when  heated,  did  not  seem  to  change  in  their  relation  to 
the  magnet  (239703  and  this  now  appears  to  be  the  case  with 
such  neutral  or  diamagnetic  bodies  as  nitrogen  and  carbonic  acid 
gases. 

2861.  The  oxygen  of  the  air  differs  in  a  most  extraordinary 
degree  from  the  nitrogen.    It  is  highly  paramagnetic,  being, 


Oct.  1850.]      Ahnospheric  magnetism — oxygen. 


225 


bulk  for  bulk,  equivalent  to  a  solution  of  protosulphate  of  iron, 
containing,  of  the  crystallized  salt,  seventeen  times  the  weight 
of  the  oxygen  (2794.).  It  becomes  less  paramagnetic,  volume 
for  volume  (2780.),  as  it  is  rarefied,  and  apparently  in  the  sim- 
ple proportion  of  its  rarefaction,  the  temperature  remaining  the 
same.  When  its  temperature  is  raised,  the  expansion  conse- 
quent thereon  being  permitted^,  it  loses  very  greatly  of  its  para- 
magnetic force;  and  there  is  sufficient  reason,  from  a  former  re- 
sult with  air^,  to  conclude,  that  when  its  temperature  is  lowered 
•its  paramagnetic  condition  is  exalted.  How  much  its  paramag- 
netic intensity  might  be  increased  by  lowering  it  to  the  tempera- 
ture of  freezing  mercury,  as  at  the  north  or  south  poles  of  the 
earth,  we  cannot  at  present  tell.  Though  a  gas,  it  is  apparently 
like  the  solid  metals,  iron,  nickel  or  cobalt,  when  they  are  within 
the  range  of  temperature  which  affects  their  magnetic  forces ; 
and  it  may,  perhaps,  like  them,  rise  by  cooling  to  a  very  high  state. 

2862.  These  relations  it  preserves  when  mingled  with  nitrogen 
in  the  air,  as  long  as  its  physical  and  chemical  conditions  remain 
unchanged ;  but  it  is  not  irrelevant  to  remark,  that  every  opera- 
tion by  which  this  active  part  of  the  atmosphere  changes  in  its  na- 
ture and  passes  into  combinations,  takes  away  its  paramagnetic 
powers,  whether  the  result  be  solid,  liquid  or  gaseous. 

2863.  Hence  the  atmosphere  is,  in  common  phrase,  a  highly 
magnetic  medium.  The  air  that  stands  upon  every  square  foot  of 
surface  on  the  earth,  is  equivalent,  in  magnetic  force,  to  8160  lbs. 
of  crystallized  protosulphate  of  iron  (2794.  2861,).  This  me- 
dium is,  by  every  change  in  its  density,  whether  of  the  kind  in- 
dicated by  the  barometer,  or  caused  by  the  presence  or  absence 
of  the  sun,  changed  in  its  magnetic  relations.  Further,  every 
variation  of  temperature  produces  apparently  its  own  change  of 
force,  in  addition  to  that  caused  by  the  mere  expansion  or  con- 
traction in  volume,  and  none  of  these  alterations  can  happen 
without  affecting  the  magnetic  force  emanating  from  the  earth, 
and  causing  variations,  both  in  its  intensity  and  direction,  at  the 
earth's  surface.  Whether  these  changes  are  in  the  right  direc- 
tion and  sufficient  in  quantity  to  supply  a  cause  for  the  variations 
of  the  terrestrial  magnetic  power,  is  the  point  now  to  be  con- 
sidered, for  the  illustration  of  which  I  will  endeavour  to  construct 

'  Philosophical  Magazine,  1847,  vol.  xxxi.  p.  417. 
*  Ibid.  p.  406. 

VOL.  III.  a 


226 


Atmospheric  magnetism.      [Series  XXVI. 


a  type  case,  and  then  apply  it,  as  well  as  I  can,  to  the  natural 
facts. 

2864.  Let  us  assume  the  existence  of  two  globes  of  air  di- 
stinct from  the  surrounding  atmosphere,  by  a  difference  of  tem- 
perature or  by  a  difference  of  density :  the  assumption  is  not 
too  extravagant  for  an  illustration,  since  Prout  showed  that  there 

-  were  masses  of  air,  larger  or  smaller,  floating  about  in  the  atmo- 
sphere, and  singularly  distinct  from  the  surrounding  parts,  by 
temperature  and  other  circumstances.  Not  to  complicate  the 
expression,  we  will  leave  out  of  view,  at  present,  the  attenuation 
upwards,  and  will  consider  one  of  these  globes  as  colder  or 
denser  than  the  contiguous  parts,  and  that  it  is  in  a  portion  of 
space  which  without  it  would  present  a  field  of  equal  magnetic 
force,  i.  e.  having  parallel  lines  of  equal  intensity  of  force  pass- 
ing across  it. 

2865.  The  air  of  such  a  globe  will  facilitate  the  transmission 
of  the  magnetic  force  through  the  space  which  it  occupies 
(2807-),  making  it  superior,  in  that  respect,  to  the  surrounding 
atmosphere  or  space,  and  therefore  more  lines  of  magnetic  force 
will  pass  through  it  than  elsewhere  (2809.).  The  disposition  of 
these  lines,  in  respect  of  the  line  of  the  dip  of  the  place,  will  be 

•  something  like  what  is  represented  in  fig,  7  (2874.),  and  con- 
sequently the  globe  will  be  polarized  as  a  conductor  (2821 .  2822.) 
of  the  paramagnetic  class.  Hence  the  intensity  of  the  magnetic 
force  and  its  direction  will  vary,  not  only  within  but  without  the 
globe,  and  these  will  vary  in  opposite  directions,  in  different 
places,  under  the  influence  of  laws  which  ai'e  perfectly  regular 
and  well  known. 

2866.  First,  as  regards  the  intensity,  which  before  was  uniform 
(2864.).  If  the  intensity  is  to  be  considered  as  expressing  the 
amount  of  force  which  passes  through  any  given  place,  then,  in 
consequence  of  the  definite  amount  of  power  which  belongs  to 
anj  section,  as  a  a,  of  a  given  amount  of  lines  of  magnetic  force 
(2809.),  a  concentration  of  these  hues  towards  the  middle,  P, 
will  cause  an  increase  of  intensity  at  that  part,  and  a  diminution 
at  some  other  parts,  as  b  b,  from  whence  the  influence  of  the 
power  has  been  partly  removed.  Hence,  supposing  the  normal 
condition  to  exist  at  a,  if  a  test  of  intensity  were  carried  from 
a  to  P,  it  would  gradually  enter  parts  b  and  c,  in  which  the 
intensity  was  less  than  the  normal  condition,  and  these  might 


Oct.  1850.]      Effect  of  cooled  air — needle  indications.  227 

be  either  without  or  within  the  globe  P,  or  both  (according  to 
its  temperature  relative  to  the  surrounding  air,  its  size  and  other 
circumstances) ;  it  would  then  arrive  at  parts  having  the  normal 
intensity;  and  lastly,  at  parts,  P,  having  an  intensity  greater 
than  the  surrounding  space ;  as  it  went  outwards,  on  the  op- 
posite side  of  P,  corresponding  variations  would  occur  in  the 
reverse  order. 

2867-  On  transporting  the  test  upwards,  in  the  direction  of 
the  dip  from  e,  where  the  intensity  may  be  considered  as  nor- 
mal, it  would  gradually  occupy  positions  at  f  g,  Sec,  in  which 
the  intensity  would  increase  until  it  arrived  at  P,  after  which 
it  would  pass  through  places  of  less  and  less  intensity,  until  at 
p  it  would  again  find  the  force  in  the  normal  state.  If  the  test, 
in  being  carried  upwards,  be  not  taken  along  the  line  of  the  dip, 
then  it  will  of  course  pass  through  variations  like  those  described 
on  the  line  a  P,  growing  more  and  more  in  extent  until  the  di- 
rection coincides  with  the  line  a  P,  which  is  at  right  angles  to 
the  dip  and  where  they  are  at  a  maximum.  Hence,  to  pass  up- 
wards through  such  a  globe  of  cold  air  in  our  latitude,  where  the 
dip  is  70°  nearly,  and  at  the  equator,  where  it  is  0°,  would  be  a 
very  different  matter,  and  the  necessary  natural  results  of  such 
a  difference  ought  to  appear  hereafter. 

2868.  But  a  magnetic  needle  or  bar  is  not  a  test  of  such  in- 
tensity, i.  e.  it  will  not  tell  these  differences,  or  it  may  tell  them 
in  a  contrary  direction.  To  understand  this  point,  we  have  to 
consider  that  a  needle  vibrates  by  gathering  upon  itself,  because 
of  its  magnetic  condition  and  polarity,  a  certain  amount  of 
the  lines  of  force,  which  would  otherwise  traverse  the  space 
about  it ;  and  assuming  that  it  underwent  no  change  by  change 
of  temperature,  it  would  be  affected  in  proportion  to  any  variations 
in  the  intensity  of  these  lines,  provided  everything  else  remained 
the  same.  But  being  under  natural  circumstances  surrounded 
by  the  atmosphere,  which  is  a  medium  liable  to  variation  in  its 
magnetic  condition,  both  by  heat  and  rarefaction,  and  by  these 
variations  affects  the  intensity  or  quantity  of  the  force,  it  will 
vary  in  its  indications  by  variations  in  these  conditions.  Thus 
for  instance,  if  it  were  in  a  large  sphere  of  oxygen,  I  expect  that 
it  would,  by  its  number  of  vibrations  or  otherwise,  indicate  a 
certain  intensity  ;  if  the  oxygen  were  expanded,  that  it  would 
mdicate  a  higher  intensity,  although  the  same  amount  of  lines 

Q  2 


228 


Atmospheric  magnetism.       [Series  XXVI. 


of  force  and  magnetic  energy  were  passing  through  the  oxygen 
as  before.  If  the  oxygen  were  made  dense,  then  becoming  a 
better  conductor,  I  presume  it  would  convey  onwards  more  of 
the  force  and  the  magnet  less,  for  the  power  would  be  partly 
transferred  from  the  unchanging  magnet  to  the  improving  con- 
ductor around  it. 

2869.  These  experiments  can  hardly  be  made  with  oxygen 
except  by  means  of  extremely  delicate  apparatus,  but  like  effects 
are  easily  shown  experimentally  in  selected  analogous  cases. 
Thus  let  a  thin  small  tube  of  flint-glass,  about  1  inch  long  and 
^  an  inch  in  diameter,  be  filled  with  a  saturated  solution  of  pro- 
tosulphate  of  iron,  and  suspended  horizontally  by  cocoon-silk 
(2279.)  between  the  poles  of  the  electro-magnet,  in  a  vessel 
which  may  either  contain  air  or  water,  or  other  media  (2406.). 
In  air  it  will  point  axially,  and  will  be  analogous  to  a  needle 
under  the  earth's  influence,  and  it  will  point  with  a  certain  amount 
of  force.  Fill  the  vessel  with  water,  and  now  it  will  point  with 
more  force  than  before,  though  the  water  is  a  worse  magnetic 
conductor  than  the  air  which  was  previously  there ;  and  it  is 
precisely  because  the  water  is  a  worse  conductor  that  the  liquid 
magnet  or  test  indicates  more  power.  Increase  the  conducting 
power  of  the  surrounding  medium  by  adding  sulphate  of  iron  to 
it,  and  the  indication  of  strength  by  the  tube  goes  on  diminishing, 
first  returning  to  the  degree  of  power  it  had  in  air,  and  then 
descending  to  lower  gradations,  for  it  returns  with  less  and  less 
force  to  its  axial  position  when  disturbed  from  it.  So  the  mag- 
netic needle  employed  for  measuring  intensity  or  magnetic  force 
(for  the  same  meaning  is  at  present  understood  by  the  two  terms), 
indicates,  in  a  certain  manner,  the  power  thrown  upon  itself, 
and,  I  conclude,  accurately,  provided  the  condition  of  the  sur- 
rounding medium  remains  magnetically  unchanged ;  but  if  it  be 
placed  in  different  media  or  in  an  altering  medium,  I  expect  that 
it  will  not  measure  accurately  the  intensity  in  them,  i.  e.  it  will 
not  measure  directly  the  amount  of  force  passing  relatively 
through  them.  The  difference  in  air  under  different  conditions 
would  be  very  small,  still  it  is  that  difference  which  concerns  us 
in  atmospheric  magnetism;  and  it  is  very  important  to  know, 
whether,  when  the.  magnet  indicates  an  increased  intensity  of 
force,  it  is  altogether  due  to  a  real  increase  of  the  amount  of  the 
power  at  its  source  as  it  comes  to  us  from  the  earth,  or  in  part 


Oct.  1850.]        Cooled  air — needle  indications.  229 

to  a  change  in  the  magnetic  constitution  of  the  space  around 
the  magnet  hitherto  unknown  to  us. 

2870.  If  what  is  now  often  indifferently  called  magnetic  force 
or  intensity  have  its  results  distinguished  as  of  two  kinds,  namely, 
those  of  quantitij  and  those  of  tension,  then  we  shall  more  readily 
comprehend  this  matter.  At  present  a  needle  shows  both  these 
as  magnetic  force,  making  no  distinction  between  them,  yet  they 
produce  effects  on  it  often  in  opposite  directions ;  for  as  they 
increase  or  diminish  they  both  affect  the  needle  alike ;  but  as  it 
is  assumed  that  the  tension  can  change  whilst  the  quantity 
remains  the  same,  and  the  quantity  can  be  altered,  yet  the  ten- 
sion remain  unaffected,  the  result  by  the  needle  will  then  be 
uncertain.  If  the  tension  in  a  given  region  be  increased  by 
diminishing  the  conducting  power,  the  needle  will  show  increased 
force ;  if  it  be  increased  by  an  increase  of  magnetic  power  in 
the  earth  from  some  internal  action,  the  needle  will  still  show 
increased  force,  and  will  not  distinguish  the  one  effect  from  the 
other.  If  the  quantity  in  a  region  be  increased  by  increasing 
the  conducting  power,  the  needle  will  show  no  such  increase  ; 
on  the  contrary,  it  will  indicate  diminution  of  force,  because  the 
tension  is  diminished  ;  or  if  the  quantity  be  diminished  by  dimi- 
nishing the  conducting  power,  it  will  show  increased  force.  The 
force  might  even  lose  in  quantity  and  gain  in  tension  in  such 
proportions  that  the  needle  should  show  no  change ;  or  it  might 
gain  in  quantity  and  lose  in  tension,  and  the  needle  still  be  en- 
tirely indifferent  to  the  whole  result. 

2871.  If  my  view  be  correct,  then  the  magnet  is  not,  as  at 
present  applied,  a  perfect  measure  of  the  earth's  magnetic  force ; 
for  that  may  not  change  when  the  magnet  by  the  influence  of 
the  different  conditions  of  day  and  night,  or  of  summer  and 
winter,  may  show  a  difference.  How  far  these  uncertainties  in 
its  indication  may  affect  the  value  of  the  observations  made  on 
the  horizontal  and  vertical  components  of  the  earth's  magnetic 
force  as  indications  of  that  which  they  are  expected  to  tell  us,  I 
do  not  know ;  but  involving,  as  the  effects  do,  two  very  different 
conditions,  namely,  variation  of  the  conducting  power  and  varia- 
tion of  the  amount  of  force  at  its  source,  the  one  of  which  is 
chiefly  in  the  atmosphere  and  the  other  in  the  earth,  it  seems 
to  me  to  be  of  great  consequence  to  the  development  of  the 
theory  of  terrestrial  magnetism,  to  have  some  method,  if  pos- 


230 


Atmospheric  magnetism.       Series  XXVI. 


sible,  of  distinguishing  these  two  points  or  effects  from  each 
other. 

2872.  Referring  again  to  the  model  globe,  fig.  7  (2874.),  it 
appears  to  me,  that  if  a  magnet  be  used  as  the  intensity  test,  it 
wilj  indicate  a  less  intensity  at  P  rather  than  a  greater  one,  for 
the  very  reason  that  the  conducting  power  of  the  whole  globe 
has  been  increased ;  and  also,  though  the  apparent  diminution 
of  intensity  will  probably  be  greater  there  than  elsewhere,  that 
the  effect  will  occur  in  other  parts,  especially'  those  on  the  right 
and  left,  and  even  at  b  and  b,  where  the  power  transmitted, 
instead  of  being  more,  as  at  P,  is  really  less  than  the  portion  trans- 
mitted in  the  normal  or  equable  state  of  the  magnetic  field. 
With  a  diamagnetic  globe  of  air,  i.  e.  one  warmer  or  more  rare- 
fied than  the  surrounding  space  (28770^  though  it  would  convey 
less  power  as  being  a  worse  conductor,  still  it  should  cause  the 
magnet  to  set  with  greater  force,  and  so  give  an  indication  of 
increased  intensity,  and  that  also  both  within  and  equatorially 
without  the  globe. 

2873.  If  it  be  true  that  the  changes  of  the  medium  (2869.) 
can  thus  affect  the  magnet,  and  that  such  changes  can  rise  up 
to  a  sensible  degree  in  the  gases,  then  a  magnet  might  make  a 
diflferent  number  of  vibrations  in  a  given  time  in  oxygen  and 
nitrogen  gases  of  the  same  density,  for  they  are  very  different 
in  their  magnetic  relations.  It  should  make  the  greatest  num- 
ber in  nitrogen ;  perhaps  a  delicate  torsion  balance  would  be  a 
still  more  sensible  test  of  such  a  result ;  but  it  is  probable  that 
the  space  around  the  needle  should  be  large,  and  it  would  be 
requisite  to  ascertain  that  the  two  media  opposed  equal  mecha- 
nical resistance  to  the  vibrating  needle. 

2874.  The  variation  of  the  direction  caused  by  the  typical 
globe  (2864.)  might  be  oblique  to  the  horizontal  and  vertical 
planes,  and  consequently  give  results  of  declination  and  inclina- 
tion, either  separately  or  together.  The  direction  would  not 
vary  in  a  central  line  parallel  to  the  general  dip  of  the  surround- 
ing space  (fig.  7).  Along  another  central  hne  perpendicular  to 
this  [i.  e.  any  line  in  the  equatorial  plane),  a  P,  there  would  also 
be  no  variation  of  the  direction,  but  in  any  other  position  there 
would  be  variations.  Thus  in  the  hne  i  r,  as  the  free  needle 
passed  from  i  to  k,  its  lower  end  would  be  carried  inwards  to- 
wards the  central  line  of  dip  P;  this  effect,  after  attaining  a 


Oct.  1850.]       Cooled  air — needle  indications.  231 

maximum,  perhaps  at  I,  would  gradually  diminish  again,  and  by 
the  time  the  needle  had  reached  r  the  dip  would  be  normal. 

Fig.  7. 


a 

i 

r 

7' 

r 

/ 

/( 

a 

\i  1 

1     1  /Ni 

e 

\ 

Corresponding  effects  would  occur  on  the  opposite  side  of  the 
axial  line  p  e ;  and  if  a  needle  be  considered  as  in  any  place  the 
dip  of  which  is  thus  affected,  and  then  be  conceived  as  travelling 
in  a  circle  round  the  axial  line  p  e,  it  would  always  be  in  the 
surface  of  a  cone,  the  apex  of  which  is  below. 

2875.  On  the  other  hand,  if  the  variations  of  the  dip  below 
the  equatorial  plane  a  P  be  considered,  they  will  be  equal  in 
amount,  but  in  the  reverse  direction,  so  that  the  magnetic  needle, 
when  deflected  from  its  normal  position,  would  have  its  upper 
end  inclined  inwards  towards  the  axial  line  p  e;  or  if  moved 
round  the  axial  line  would  always  be  in  a  conical  surface,  the 
apex  of  which  is  above. 

2876.  So  the  dip  would  vary  in  such  a  globe  of  air  in  every 
azimuth ;  and  it  would  also  vary  in  opposite  directions  in  the 
upper  and  lower  parts  of  the  globe,  and  of  the  affected  sur- 
rounding space. 

2877-  If  we  assume  the  exist-        Fig.  8.  Fig.  9. 

ence  of  another  typical  globe  of 
air  (2864.),  having  a  higher  tem- 
perature than  the  surrounding 
atmosphere,  then  its  condition 
will  be  that  of  a  diamagnetic  con- 
ductor, and  will  be  represented  by 
fig.  9  (2807.) ;  and  it  will  have  power  to  affect  both  the  intensity 


232  Atmospheric  magnetism.        [Series  XXVI. 

and  the  direction  of  the  Hnes  of  force,  in  conformity  witli  the  ac- 
tion of  the  former  globe,  but  in  the  contrary  order.  As  regards 
the  action  of  these  globes,  consequent  upon  the  direction  of  the 
lines  of  force  in  and  about  them  upon  a  needle  coming  within 
their  influence,  it  may,  in  part,  be  represented  by  a  magnet 
placed  either  in  the  direction  of  the  needle  for  the  cold  globe, 
or  in  the  reverse  direction  for  the  warni  one ;  but  as  the  lines 
of  force  of  the  combined  system  of  the  earth  and  such  a  magnet 
are  very  different  in  their  arrangement  to  the  lines  of  the  earth 
affected  by  masses  of  warm  or  cold  air  having  only  conduction 
polarity  (2820.),  it  would  be  too  much  to  say  that  they  corre- 
spond, or  that  the  effects  on  the  intensity  or  direction  would  be 
the  same  for  similar  distance  from  the  centre  of  the  globe  of  air 
and  the  representative  magnet. 


2878.  In  endeavouring  to  proceed,  from  these  hypothetical 
and  comparatively  simple  cases,  which  are  given  only  to  lead  the 
mind  on  from  the  results  of  experiment  to  the  supposed  condi- 
tion of  matters  as  regards  our  atmosphere  and  the  earth,  we  have 
to  consider,  that  though  there  will  be  an  effect,  and  though  the 
intensity  and  direction  of  the  magnetic  force,  upon  the  surface 
of  the  earth,  must  vary  with  changes  of  temperature  and  density 
of  the  atmosphere,  still  it  will  be  in  a  manner  very  different  from 
that  represented  by  the  typical  globe  of  air,  for  the  latter  is  a 
case  which  will  never  occur,  though  the  variations  of  the  natural 
case  are  almost  infinite.  Still  the  comparison  holds  in  principle, 
and  we  may  expect  that  as  the  sun  leaves  us  on  the  west,  some 
effect,  correspondent  to  that  of  the  approach  of  a  body  of  cold 
air  from  the  east,  will  be  produced,  which  will  increase  and  then 
diminish,  and  be  followed  by  another  series  of  effects  as  the  sun 
rises  again  and  brings  warm  air  with  him. 

2879.  The  atmosphere  diminishes  in  density  upwards,  and 
that  diminution  will  affect  the  transmission  of  the  magnetic 
force,  but  as  far  as  it  is  constant,  the  effect  produced  by  it  will 
be  constant  too.  The  portion  of  the  atmosphere  which  lies 
under  the  heating  influence  of  the  sun,  as  compared  to  its  depth, 
will  more  resemble  a  slice  of  air  wrapped  round  the  earth  than 
a  globe.  Still  the  inflection  of  the  lines  of  force,  both  above  and 
below  this  stratum,  will  occur,  extending  into  space  above  and 


Oct.  1850.]       Distribution  of  magnetic  force.  233 

into  the  earth  beneath  (2848.),  according  to  the  known  influence 
of  magnetic  power  and  its  perfectly  definite  character  (2809.). 
We  are  placed  at  the  bottom  of  this  layer  of  air,  but  as  the 
atmosphere  is  denser  there  than  higher  up,  and  is  also  in  many 
cases  more  affected  there  by  changes  of  temperature,  we  are 
probably  in  a  position  where  the  inflections  and  variations  due 
to  the  assumed  causes  exist  in  a  considerable  degree. 

2880.  There  are  innumerable  circumstances  that  will  break 
up,  more  or  less,  any  general  or  average  arrangement  of  the  air 
temperature.  For  instance,  the  diversity  of  sea  and  land  causes 
variations  of  temperature  differently  in  different  times  of  the 
year,  and  the  extent  to  which  this  goes  may  be  learned  from 
the  beautiful  isothermal  charts  of  Dove,  now  fortunately  to  be 
had  in  this  country  ^  These  variations  may  be  expected  to  give, 
not  merely  differences  in  the  regularity,  direction  and  degree  of 
magnetic  variation  ;  but  because  of  vicinity,  differences  so  large 
as  to  be  manifold  greater  than  the  mean  difference  for  a  given 
short  period,  and  they  may  also  cause  irregularities  in  the  times 
of  their  occurrence. 

2881.  On  considering  the  probable  results  of  the  magnetic 
action  of  the  atmosphere,  it  appears  to  me  that  if  the  terrestrial 
magnetic  force  could  be  freed  from  all  periodical  and  small  per- 
turbations, and  its  disposition  ascertained  for  any  given  time, 
it  might  still  include  certain  effects  constituting  a  part  of  atmo- 
spheric magnetism.  For  instance,  there  is  more  air,  by  weight, 
over  a  given  portion  of  the  surface  of  the  earth  at  latitudes  from 
24°  to  34°,  than  there  is  either  at  higher  latitudes  or  at  the 
equator ;  and  that  should  cause  a  difference  from  the  disposition 
of  the  lines  of  force  which  would  exist  if  there  were  equality  in 
that  respect,  or  if  the  atmosphere  were  away.  Again,  the  tem- 
perature of  the  air  is  greater  at  the  equatorial  parts  than  in 
latitudes  north  or  south  of  it ;  and  as  elevation  of  temperature 
diminishes  the  conducting  power  for  magnetism,  so  the  propor- 
tion of  force  passing  through  these  parts  ought  to  be  less,  and 
that  passing  through  the  colder  parts  greater,  than  if  the  tem- 
perature of  the  air  were  at  the  same  mean  degree  over  the  whole 
surface  of  the  globe,  or  than  if  the  air  were  away.  Again,  there 
is  a  greater  difference  in  range  of  temperature  of  the  air  at  the 


'  Report  of  the  British  Association,  1848,  Reports,  p.  85. 


234  Atmospheric  magnetism.       [Series  XXVI. 

equator  as  we  rise  upwards  than  in  other  parts,  and  hence  the 
lower  part  is  not  so  good  a  conductor  proportionately  to  the 
upper  part,  or  to  space,  as  elsewhere,  where  the  difference  is 
not  so  great ;  the  magnetic  power,  therefore,  should  be  in  some 
degree  weakened  there,  the  lines  of  force  being  diverted,  more 
or  less,  from  the  warm  air  and  thrown  into  other  parts,  as  the 
cooler  atmosphere  and  space  above,  or  the  earth  beneath,  ac- 
cording to  the  principles  before  explained  (2808.  2821.  2877.). 

2882.  The  result  of  annual  variation  that  may  be  expected 
from  the  magnetic  constitution  and  condition  of  the  atmosphere 
seems  to  me  to  be  of  the  following  kind.  Assuming  that  the 
axis  of  rotation  of  the  earth  was  perpendicular  to  the  plane  of  its 
orbit  round  the  sun,  and  dismissing  for  the  present  other  causes 
of  magnetic  variation  than  those  due  to  the  atmosphere,  the 
two  hemispheres  of  the  earth,  and  the  portions  of  air  covering 
them,  would  be  affected  and  warmed  alike  by  the  sun,  or  at 
least  would  come  into  a  constant  relative  state,  dependent  upon 
the  arrangement  of  land  and  water;  and  the  lines  of  magnetic 
force  having  taken  up  their  position  under  the  influence  of  the 
great  dominant  causes,  whatever  they  may  be,  would  not  be 
altered  by  any  annual  change  due  to  the  atmosphere,  since  the 
daily  mean  of  the  atmospheric  effect  in  a  given  place  would  at 
all  parts  of  the  year  be  alike.  Under  such  circumstances  the 
intensity  and  direction  of  the  magnetic  forces  might  be  con- 
sidered constant,  presuming  no  sensible  change  to  take  place  by 
the  difference  in  distance  from  the  sun  which  would  occur  in 
different  parts  of  the  orbit ;  and,  as  regards  the  two  magnetic 
hemispheres,  each  would  be  the  equivalent  of  and  equal  to  the 
other,  and  they  may  for  the  time  be  considered  in  their  mean  or 
normal  state. 

2883.  But  as  the  axis  of  the  earth's  rotation  is  inchned 
23°  28'  to  the  plane  of  the  ecliptic,  the  two  hemispheres  will 
become  alternately  warmer  and  colder  than  each  other,  and  then 
a  variation  in  the  magnetic  condition  may  arise.  The  air  of  the 
cooled  hemisphere  will  conduct  magnetic  influence  more  freely 
than  if  in  the  mean  state,  and  the  lines  of  force  passing  through 
it  will  increase  in  amount,  whilst  in  the  other  hemisphere  the 
warmed  air  will  conduct  with  less  readiness  than  before,  and 
the  intensity  will  diminish.    In  addition  to  this  effect  of  tem- 


Oct.  1850.]        Annual  variation  considered.  235 

perature,  there  ought  to  be  another  due  to  the  inci-ease  of  the 
ponderable  portion  of  the  air  in  the  cooled  hemisphere,  conse- 
quent upon  its  contraction  and  the  coincident  expansion  of  the 
air  in  the  warmer  half,  both  of  which  circumstances  tend  to  in- 
crease the  variation  in  power  of  the  two  hemispheres  from  the 
normal  state.  Then  as  the  earth  rolls  on  in  its  annual  journey, 
that  which  at  one  time  was  the  cooler  becomes  the  warmer  hemi- 
sphere, and  consequently  in  its  turn  sinks  as  far  below  the  ave- 
rage magnetic  intensity  as  it  before  had  stood  above  it,  whilst 
the  other  hemisphere  changes  its  magnetic  condition  from  less 
to  more  intense. 

2884.  As  the  sum  of  the  magnetic  forces  which  crop  out  from 
the  earth  wherever  there  is  dip  on  one  side  of  the  magnetic 
equator  must  correspond  to  the  sum  of  like  force  on  the  other 
side  (2809.),  so  they  would  not  become  more  intense  in  one 
hemisphere,  or  more  feeble  in  the  other,  without  a  corresponding 
contraction  on  the  one  hand,  and  enlargement  on  the  other. 
The  line  of  no  dip  round  the  globe  may  therefore  be  expected  to 
move  alternately  north  and  south  every  year,  or  some  effect  equi- 
valent to  that  take  place.  The  condition  of  the  two  hemispheres 
under  this  view  may  be  conceived  by  supposing  an  annual  un- 
dulation of  the  force  to  and  fro  between  them,  during  which, 
though  neither  the  character  nor  the  general  disposition  of  the 
power  be  altered,  there  is  in  our  winter  a  concentration  and  in- 
crease of  intensity  in  the  northern  parts  coincident  with  a  dif- 
fused and  diminished  intensity  in  the  south,  and  in  summer  the 
reverse. 

2885.  In  respect  of  direction,  alterations  may  also  be  antici- 
pated. In  the  first  place,  and  assuming  that  the  magnetic  poles 
and  the  poles  of  the  earth  coincide,  the  dip  would  increase  in 
the  cooling  hemisphere  towards  the  middle  and  polar  parts;  but 
it  ought  to  diminish  towards  the  magnetic  equator,  to  accord 
with  the  concentration  of  the  hemisphere  of  stronger  power  and 
enlargement  of  the  weaker  one ;  whilst  on  the  other  hand  the 
dip  ought  to  diminish  at  the  polar  and  middle  parts  of  the  warm- 
ing hemisphere  and  increase  towards  the  magnetic  equator. 
The  magnetic  equator  would  shift  a  little  north  and  south  of  its 
mean  place  during  each  year,  simultaneously  with  the  whole 
system  of  magnetic  lines.  But  as  the  magnetic  poles  do  not 
comcide  with  those  of  the  earth,  or  with  what  may  be  called  the 


236 


Atmospheric  magnetism.       [Series  XXVI. 


poles  of  the  changing  temperatures,  so  a  cause  of  difference  in 
direction  will  here  arise. 

2886.  Again,  it  may  be  that  as  oxygen  is  cooled,  its  paramag- 
netic power  may  increase  in  a  more  rapid  proportion  than  that 
of  the  change  of  temperature,  so  that  the  chief  alteration  of  the 
disposition  of  the  earth^s  force  may  be  in  the  extreme  northern 
and  southern  parts;  and  in  combination  with  the  holding  power 
of  the  earth  (2907.)  n^ay  even  cause  a  change  the  reverse  of  that 
expected  above  in  lower  latitudes.  If  in  our  winter  the  lines  of 
force  were  to  close  together  in  the  polar  parts  and  to  open  out 
in  lower  latitudes,  the  balance  of  magnetic  force  would  just  as 
well  be  sustained  as  if  all  the  lines  in  our  hemisphere  were  to  be 
compressed  and  strengthened,  and  be  compensated  for  by  a 
corresponding  change  in  the  south.  In  the  former  case,  each 
hemisphere  would  balance  its  own  forces,  in  the  latter  they 
would  be  balanced  against  each  other.  There  can,  I  think,  be 
no  doubt,  that  as  far  as  Ijie  mass  of  the  earth  and  the  space 
above  our  atmosphere  are  unchangeable  in  relation  to  annual 
and  diurnal  variation,  so  far  they  would  tend  to  restrain  any 
variation  which  might  depend  only  on  the  varying  temperature 
and  state  of  the  air ;  holding  as  it  were  the  two  sides  of  the  va- 
riations, the  increase  and  diminution  of  intensity,  or  the  right 
and  left  hand  in  change  of  direction,  nearer  together  than  they 
otherwise  would  be. 

2887-  Further,  if  it  be  supposed  that  the  whole  of  a  hemi- 
sphere is  affected  at  once  in  the  same  direction  by  change  of 
temperature,  it  will  not  be  affected  alike,  but  differently  in  dif- 
ferent latitudes,  because  of  the  difference  in  amount  of  that 
change. 

2888.  The  difference  of  land  and  water  (2880.)  will  still  fur- 
ther break  up  any  expected  uniformity  of  the  general  result,  and 
cause  that  certain  parts  of  the  cooling  hemisphere  shall  increase 
in  power  more  in  proportion  than  other  parts;  and  when 
these  parts  lie  on  opposite  sides  of  the  magnetic  meridian  of  any 
given  place,  they  would  probably  have  power  to  cause  an  altera- 
tion in  the  declination  of  the  needle  at  that  place. 

2889.  As  the  annual  changes  of  temperature  are  less  at  the 
equator  than  in  parts  more  north  or  south,  so  there,  probably, 
little  or  no  annual  variation  would  occur:  none  indeed  as  regards 
the  varying  temperature  or  expansion  of  the  air,  but  only  that 


Oct.  1850.] 


Annual  variation. 


237 


portion  which  is  consequent  upon  the  alternate  changes  of  the 
parts  on  its  opposite  sides  (2884.). 

2890.  Another  effect,  which  may  be  considered  as  an  annual 
variation,  but  which  is  connected  with  the  diurnal  change,  may 
be  expected.  As  the  daily  changes  in  temperature  of  the  atmo- 
sphere, influential  upon  a  given  place  in  north  or  south  medium 
latitudes,  are  greater  in  extent  in  summer  than  in  winter,  so  the 
corresponding  magnetic  variations  may  be  expected  to  vary  also, 
being  larger  in  the  northern  hemisphere,  when  the  sun  is  on 

•  the  north  side  of  the  equator,  and  less  when  he  is  present  in  the 
southern  hemisphere,  and  producing  like  correspondent  change 
there. 

2891.  From  a  most  important  investigation  by  Colonel 
Sabine founded  on  the  results  of  observations  at  Toronto  and 
Hobarton,  the  facts  appear  to  be  that  the  magnetic  intensity  is 
greater  in  both  hemispheres  in  those  months  which  are  winter 
in  the  northern  hemisphere,  and  summer  in  the  southern.  Simi- 
lar results  are  greatly  wanted  for  other  localities,  and  would  show 
whether  the  different  disposition  of  land  and  sea  has  anything 
to  do  with  the  question,  or  whether  the  results  at  Toronto  and 
Hobarton  are  true  exponents  of  hemispherical  effects.  As- 
suming Toronto  and  Hobarton  as  being  such  exponents,  the 
dip  in  both  hemispheres  is  greater  (i.  e.  greater  north  dip  at 
Toronto  and  south  dip  at  Hobarton)  in  those  months  which  are 
winter  in  the  northern,  and  summer  in  the  southern  hemisphere. 
Whether  there  is  any  annual  variation  of  the  dip  or  total  force 
in  the  equatorial  parts  of  the  globe  is  very  important  to  deter- 
mine. It  would  be  well  worth  while  to  take  up  a  station  for 
the  express  purpose ;  the  instruments  are  very  simple,  and  the 
observations  would  require  only  a  single  observer.  They  are 
described  in  the  paper  referred  to.  Unfortunately  such  obser- 
vations are  not  even  made  in  Great  Britain. 


2892.  The  manner  in  which  the  diurnal  variation  may  be 
produced  or  affected  by  the  action  of  the  sun  on  our  atmo- 
sphere as  the  earth  revolves  in  its  beams,  has  been  already 
generally  referred  to.     The  whole  portion  of  atmosphere  ex- 

'  On  the  means  adopted  for  determining  the  Absolute  Values,  Secular 
Change,  and  Annual  Variation  of  the  Magnetic  Force,  Philosophical  Transac- 
tions, 1850,  p.  201, 


238 


Atmospheric  magnetism.       [Series  XXVI. 


posed  to  the  sun  receives  power  to  refract  the  lines  of  magnetic 
force  which  traverse  it,  and  the  whole  of  that  which  covers  the 
darker  hemisphere  assumes  an  equally  altered,  but  contrary  state 
relative  to  the  mean  condition  of  the  air.  It  is  as  if  the  earth 
were  inclosed  within  two  enormous  magnetic  lenses  competent 
to  affect  the  direction  of  the  Unes  of  force  passing  through  them. 

2893.  I  have  already  said  that  the  action  of  the  atmosphere 
thus  affected  might  in  some  degree  be  compared  at  night  time 
to  that  of  an  enormous,  diffuse,  and  very  feeble  ordinary  mag- 
net, having  the  position  that  it  would  naturally  take  according 
to  the  line  of  dip,  passing  over  us  from  east  to  west,  and  inclu- 
ding us  for  the  time  within  its  influence:  in  the  daytime  the  ac- 
tion wouldbe  like  that  of  the  similar  journey,  not  of  a  correspond- 
ing magnet  reversed  in  direction,  but  of  a  corresponding  globe 
of  diamagnetic  matter  (2821.).  Assuming  the  maximum  heat 
and  cold  to  occur  at  midday  and  midnight,  we  might  expect 
that  the  maximum  effects  would  also  occur  near  those  periods 
as  regards  the  variations  of  intensity  (2824.  2866.) ;  for,  other 
things  being  the  same,  the  central  parts  of  the  heated  and  cooled 
masses  are  those  where  the  difference  of  intensity  should  be 
greatest. 

2894.  It  might  be  expected  that  this  variation  in  the  intensity 
would  be  greatest  at  those  parts  of  the  globe  over  which  the  sun 
passes  vertically,  or  nearly  so ;  but  that  may  depend  upon  two 
circumstances  at  least ;  first,  whether  the  difference  in  the  day 
and  night  temperature  is  greaterthere  than  at  other  places,because 
the  extent  of  the  variation  may  be  dependent  in  part  upon  that 
difference;  and  next,  whether  the  amount  of  effect  to  be  ex- 
pected is  the  same  for  the  same  difference  in  number  of  degrees 
of  temperature  at  every  part  of  the  scale  (2886.).  If  the  con- 
ducting power  of  oxygen  (2800.)  should  be  found  by  future  ex- 
perimental measurements  (2960.)  to  increase  in  a  greater  pro- 
portion for  a  fall  of  a  given  number  of  degrees  at  lower  tem- 
perature than  at  high  ones  (including  the  effect  of  contraction 
for  that  fall  (2861.)),  then  it  may  be  that  parts  more  distant  from 
the  sun  will  be  more  affected  than  those  under  it ;  or  if  the  con- 
trary be  the  case,  less  affected  than  otherwise  would  be  expected. 

2895.  With  regard  to  the  daily  variations,  as  respects  the 
direction  of  the  lines  of  terrestrial  magnetic  force,  or  the  inclina- 
tion and  declination  of  the  magnetic  needle,  the  principles  of 


Oct.  1850.] 


Diurnal  variation. 


239 


the  changes  that  may  be  expected  to  occur  have  been  already- 
referred  to  (2879.) ;  and  it  remains  for  me  to  compare  these  ex- 
pectations with  a  few  simple  cases  of  observation,  in  such  a 
general  manner  as  will  tend  to  show  whether  the  direction  of 
action  is,  both  in  theory  and  fact,  the  same  ;  and  whether  there 
is  any  probability  that  the  effect  has  been  assigned  to  its  true 
cause ;  for  this  purpose  I  will  confine  myself  entirely  at  present 
to  a  part  of  the  daily  variation,  namely,  the  effect  of  the  sun  and 
air  as  the  luminary  arrives  at  and  passes  over  the  meridian. 

2896.  Profiting  by  the  last  volume  which  has  issued  from  the 
powerful  mind  and  careful  hands  of  Colonel  Sabine^,  I  will  take 
the  case  of  Hobarton.  The  observatory  there  is  in  latitude  42° 
52'-5  south,  and  longitude  147°  2  7'- 5  east  of  Greenwich.  The 
absolute  declination  is  9°  60'-8  east,  and  the  dip  is  70°  39'  south. 
In  order  to  have  the  place  of  the  sun  and  the  time  of  maximum 
and  minimum  temperatures  at  hand,  I  have  transferred  the 
mean  temperature  for  January  (summer)  for  seven  years,  1841-48, 
and  the  mean  temperature  for  June  (winter)  for  the  same  pe- 
riod, corresponding  to  every  hour  in  the  day  and  night,  from 
pp.  Ixxxiv.  and  cviii.  to  fig.  10,  Plate  I.,  where  the  middle  series 
of  numbers  represents  the  hours,  the  line  next  below  them  a  base 
line  of  temperature  at  30°  Fahr.,  and  the  two  curves  still  lower 
down  the  mean  hourly  temperature  for  summer  and  winter. 
The  short  lines  show  generally  the  direction  of  the  needle  east 
or  west  of  its  mean  position,  the  upper  end  being  of  course  the 
north  extremity.  The  positions  about  noon  are  distinguished 
by  full  lines,  being  those  required  for  more  immediate  illus- 
tration. 

2897.  The  north  end  of  the  magnetic  needle  at  Hobarton  is 
most  east  at  2  o'clock,  and  most  west  about  21  o'clock.  Beino- 
at  the  extreme  west  at  the  latter  hour,  it  passes  through  the 
full  range  of  variation,  or  to  the  extreme  east  in  five  hours,  or 
by  2  o'clock,  and  then  requires  the  remaining  nineteen  hours  to 
return  to  the  utmost  west.  The  maximum  east  and  west  decli- 
nation is  at  2  and  21  o'clock  for  summer,  and  at  3  and  22  o'clock 
for  winter.  The  vertical  positions  show  at  what  hours  the  decli- 
nation was  0,  and  correspond  with  Sabine's  zero.  From  21  to 
2  o'clock  the  needle  passes  from  one  extremity  of  its  variation 
to  the  other,  the  north  or  upper  end  travelling  in  the  reverse 

'  Magnetical  and  Meteorological  Observations,  Hobarton,  vol.  i.  1850. 


240 


Atmospheric  magnetism.        [Series  XXVI. 


direction  to  the  sun,  so  that  it  and  the  sun  cross  the  meridian 
together  in  opposite  directions,  nearly  about  or  a  httle  before 
noon.  About  2  o'clock  the  needle  is  arrested,  and  after  that 
time  returns  west,  following  the  sun.  It  will  be  proper  to  state, 
that  the  north  end  of  the  needle,  the  motion  of  which  has  just 
been  described,  is  the  end  towards  the  equator,  and  also,  the 
upper  end  of  a  dipping-needle  at  Hobarton.  This  distinction 
will  receive  more  significance  presently. 

2898.  Hence  the  cause  which  affects  the  needle  appears  to  be 
far  more  powerful,  and  more  concentrated  in  time  when  the  sun 
is  present  than  when  he  is  away.  In  this  there  is  accordance 
between  the  time  of  the  effect  and  the  time  when  the  sun  could 
exert  most  influence  on  those  magnetic  conditions  of  the  atmo- 
sphere, which  are  for  the  present  supposed  to  govern  that  effect. 

2899.  It  will  be  seen  by  examination  of  fig.  10,  that  the  time 
of  maximum  temperature  is  not  when  the  sun  is  on  the  meridian, 
but  two  hours  after  it,  both  in  summer  and  winter.  But  in  re- 
ference to  temperature  and  its  effect  on  the  magnetic  condition 
of  the  air,  and  through  that  on  the  needle,  it  is  not  the  local 
temperature  which  is  supposed  to  influence  the  needle,  but  that 
which  affects  enormous  masses  of  air,  above  as  well  as  below, 
and  of  which  the  temperature  at  the  spot,  however  important  it 
may  become  when  we  can  properly  interpret  it,  gives  us  as  yet 
little  or  no  knowledge.  Still  there  are  some  points  on  which 
temperature  has  a  more  direct  bearing.  Thus  the  amount  of 
variation  of  temperature  is  in  summer  double  what  it  is  in  winter, 
and  the  amount  of  variation  in  the  declination  increases  in  the 
same  proportion  (2S90.).  The  minimum  temperature  in  winter 
is  later  than  in  summer,  and  the  extreme  w^estern  declination  of 
the  needle  is  also  later  at  the  same  period. 

290G.  The  varying  direction  of  the  magnetic  lines  of  the  earth 
is  made  known  to  us  by  observations  in  two  planes,  one  the 
horizontal  plane,  to  which  the  position  east  and  west  is  referred, 
constituting  declination,  and  the  other  a  vertical  plane  passing 
through  the  hne  of  mean  declination,  and  supplying  observa- 
tions of  inclination.  The  direction  of  the  line  of  force  referred 
to  this  plane  might  change  so  as  either  to  increase  or  diminish 
the  inclination,  and  it  does  increase  at  some  places  for  the  same 
hour  of  local  time  for  which  it  diminishes  at  others ;  thus  it  in- 
creases at  Greenwich  whilst  it  diminishes  at  St.  Helena,  which 


Oct.  1850.]       Diurnal  variation— direction.  241 

is  nearly  in  the  same  meridian.  At  Hobarton  it  changes  rapidly 
at  the  east  and  west  extremes  of  the  variation,  i.  e.  about  2  and 
21  o'clock.  From  noon  it  diminishes  until  about  3  o'clock ;  it 
then  continues  nearly  the  same  in  summer,  when  the  variation 
is  greatest  until  18  or  19  o'clock,  from  that  time  it  increases 
until  about  22  o'clock,  and  is  nearly  a  maximum  from  thence 
till  noon.  Hence  it  will  be  understood,  that  the  inclination  is 
generally  greatest  during  the  rapid  journey  of  the  north  end  of 
the  needle  from  west  to  east  between  21  and  2  o'clock,  and 
least  in  the  other  or  prolonged  half  of  the  journey ;  and  though 
this  is  partly  broken  up  in  the  night  effect,  to  be  considered 
hereafter,  still  as  a  general  result  it  always  appears. 

2901.  All  this  maybe  roughly  represented  by  fig.  11  (2909.), 
in  which  E.  W.  represents  the  path  of  the  sun  between  the 
tropics  as  he  comes  up  with  the  hours  21^,  22^,  &c.  in  his  daily 
journey,  and  e  the  path  described  by  the  north  or  upper  end  of 
the  needle,  freely  suspended  at  Hobarton,  and  therefore  showing 
both  declination  and  inclination,  i.  e.  the  whole  direction. 
Looking  down  upon  such  a  needle,  its  upper  end  will  take  the 
course  indicated  by  the  arrow,  and  its  position  at  any  given 
hour  is  shown  sufficiently  by  the  leading  lines. 

2902.  This  relation  of  the  motion  of  the  needle  to  that  of  the 
sun  has  long  been  known ;  it  has  great  significance  in  relation 
to  my  hypothesis  of  the  physical  cause  of  these  variations.  As 
regards  the  part  of  the  action  which  I  am  considering,  it  is  as  if 
the  pole  of  a  magnet  came  on  with  the  sun,  of  like  nature  to  the 
upper  end  of  the  Hobarton  needle,  and  at  first  drives  that  end 
west.  Towards  19  o'clock  the  tendency  westward  diminishes, 
but  the  tendency  south  increases.  At  21  o'clock,  the  increase 
in  the  sun's  power,  acting  not  directly  from  the  sun  but  from  a 
region  in  the  atmosphere  beneath  it,  is  not  sufficient  to  compen- 
sate for  his  more  unfavourable  position ;  the  earth's  force  brings 
the  needle  back  as  regards  declination,  and  then  it  passes  east- 
wards, but  the  southerly  motion  or  inclination  still  increases ; 
about  24  o'clock,  or  noon,  the  sun  is  as  to  east  or  west  declina- 
tion indifferent,  but  powerful  in  southern  action,  making  the 
inclination  then,  or  soon  after,  a  maximum.  Then  as  the  sun 
goes  west  of  the  needle,  its  power  in  driving  the  pole  behind  it 
eastward,  will  increase  for  a  time,  whilst  the  power  producing 
inclination  will  diminish,  until  at  2  or  3  o'clock  the  earth's  force 

VOL.  III.  R, 


242 


'Atmospheric  magnetism.       [Series  XXVI. 


will  regain  preponderance  as  the  sun's  power  diminishes  by 
distance,  and  the  needle  will  return  towards  its  least  dip  and 
mean  inclination. 

2903.  All  this  may  be  represented  experimentally  by  carrying 
a  magnetic  pole  north  of  the  dipping-needle,  so  as  to  represent 
the  place  of  the  sun-heated  air  to  Hobarton,  provided  that  pole 
be  of  the  same  kind  as  the  north  or  upper  pole  of  the  needle. 
I  have  already  stated  (2877'  2863.),  that  when  a  portion  of  air 
is  heated  in  a  field  of  magnetic  power,  it  loses  in  magnetic  con- 
duction power,  and  if  in  association  with  air  less  heated  deflects 
the  lines,  assuming  the  state  which  I  have  distinguished  as  that 
of  diamagnetic  conduction  polarity ;  then  presenting  the  very- 
polarity,  or  rather  the  very  inflection  of  the  lines  of  force,  which 
would  aflfect  the  needle,  as  it  is  affected.  As  the  sun  rises  and 
passes  north  of  such  a  place  as  Hobarton,  the  atmosphere  under 
his  coming  influence  becomes  more  and  more  heated  and  ex- 
panded; and  referring  to  the  model  globes  of  air  (2864.  28770^ 
it  is  as  if  such  a  warm  mass  passed  with  the  sun  through  all  the 
regions  of  the  equator,  extending  also  far  north  and  south  of  it ; 
and,  having  Hobarton  within  its  influence,  produced  the  effects 
there  observed. 

2904.  In  such  a  view  one  sees  a  reason  for  the  short  time 
occupied  in  the  return  of  the  needle  from  west  to  east  as  the 
sun  passes  immediately  over  its  meridian,  and  for  the  long  time 
during  which  it  is  passing  from  east  to  west  as  the  influence  of 
the  sun  is  slowly  withdrawn,  and  then  again  slowly  renewed 
during  the  remaining  part  of  his  journey,  exception  being  made 
for  the  present  of  the  paramagnetic  effects  due  to  cold. 

2905.  I  will  now  consider  the  Toronto  case  of  diurnal  varia- 
tion as  it  is  presented  to  us  in  the  volume  of  magnetical  observa- 
tions, issuing  from  the  same  authority  and  hands  as  the  former 
volume^,  and  also  in  further  observations  down  to  1848,  sent  to 
me  by  the  kindness  of  Colonel  Sabine.  The  position  of  the 
observatory  is  in  lat.  43°  39'  35"  N.  and  long.  79°  21'  30"  W. 
The  absolute  declination  is  1°  21'  3"  W.,  and  the  mean  or  ab- 
solute dip  is  75°  15'  N.,  so  that  as  regards  Hobarton  it  is  on  the 
other  side  of  the  equator,  and  nearly  on  the  other  side  of  the 
world.    The  results  for  the  months  of  June  and  December  are 

»  Magnetical  and  Meteorological  Observations.  Toronto,  1840,  1841,  1842, 
Sabine. 


Oct.  1850.]       Diurnal  variation — direction. 


243 


placed  in  a  diagram  corresponding  to  that  for  Hobarton  (2896.), 
employing  the  Toronto  time  for  the  hours,  Plate  I.  fig.  12. 

2906.  The  north  end  of  the  needle  is  that  universally  referred 
to  in  speaking  of  the  declination ;  its  course  at  Toronto,  during 
the  immediate  sun  effect,  is  as  follows : — Having  gradually  moved 
east  from  16^,  it  is  at  extreme  east  at  20  o'clock,  and  then  returns 
from  the  east  to  extreme  west  in  six  hours,  after  which  it  moves 
eastward  from  the  sun.  But  if  we  convert  this  into  the  motion 
of  the  equatorial  extremity  of  the  needle,  for  that  is  the  upper 
end  if  the  needle  be  free,  and  concerns  us  most  in  the  com- 
parison with  Hobarton,  then  it  will  be  seen  that  this  end  is  most 
west  at  19^^  or  20^;  and  leaving  that  position  at  that  hour,  it 
travels  quickly  eastward,  passing  through  the  full  range  of  varia- 
tion or  to  extreme  east  in  six  hours,  or  until  2\  and  then  returns, 
following  the  sun. 

2907.  Looking  at  these  results,  I  might  repeat  the  words 
used  in  illustration  of  the  Hobarton  effects,  but  for  the  sake  of 
brevity  will  simply  refer  to  them.  As  before,  the  amount  of 
variation  in  the  declination  is  in  summer  double  what  it  is  in 
winter.  The  difference  of  temperature  is  three  times  greater. 
The  extreme  west  and  east  declination  is  both  in  summer  and 
winter  at  20  and  at  2  o'clock,  so  that  the  magnet  holds  to  the 
time  in  both  seasons;  but  the  maxima  and  minima  of  cold,  as 
shown  before,  vary  in  the  two  seasons,  for  the  former  is  at 
4  o'clock  in  summer  and  2  in  winter,  whilst  the  latter  is  at 
16  o'clock  in  summer,  and  20  o'clock  in  winter.  But  this  is  a  va- 
riation with  consistency ;  for  it  will  be  seen  by  a  moment's  inspec- 
tion, that  in  winter  the  maximum  of  heat  has  moved  towards  the 
time  of  most  powerful  action  in  the  one  direction,  and  the  minimum 
has  moved  towards  it  in  the  other.  The  passage  of  the  sun, 
therefore,  over  the  meridian,  and  the  period  of  rapid  motion 
of  the  needle  from  west  to  east,  still  coincide. 

2908.  The  other  element  of  direction  is  the  inclination.  Its 
variation  is  very  small,  but  changes  thus.  A  principal  maxi- 
mum dip  occurs  at  22  o'clock,  and  the  extreme  minimum  dip 
at  4  o'clock. 

2909.  So  all  the  effects  may  again  be  generally  represented 
by  an  eUipse  (fig.  13)  as  they  were  for  Hobarton ;  and  I  may 
refer  to  the  words  then  used,  substituting  Toronto  for  Hobarton 
and  north  for  south  (2901.).    As  the  sun  comes  up  from  the 

B  2 


244 


Atmospheric  magnetism.       [Series  XXVI. 


east  in  his  course  between  the  two  places,  he  drives,  by  the 
altered  atmosphere  beneath  him,  the  upper  ends  of  their  needles 
before  him,  and  outwards  from  the  line  of  his  path,  as  if  he 


Fig.  13. 

TORONTO  1 


■\V  T-T  >  r  1  1  1  1   -E 

3         a  X  !  S3         23         81  ao 


Fig.  n 


OBARTON 


were  a  north  pole  to  the  Hobarton  magnet,  and  a  south  pole 
to  the  Toronto  magnet.  By  22  o'clock,  the  earth's  force,  and 
the  action  of  the  air  due  to  the  sun's  position,  permit  a  re- 
turn to  the  east,  though  the  inclination  for  a  time  increases 
(2902.) ;  both  swing  rapidly  round  from  west  to  east  as  he 
passes  over  the  meridian,  and  then  having  attained  their  maxi- 
mum position  eastward,  soon  follow  after  him  under  the  influ- 
ence of  the  earth's  force,  less  and  less  counteracted  by  the  re- 
treating sun.  So  striking  is  the  similarity  between  Hobarton 
and  Toronto,  that  Colonel  Sabine  has  already  especially  distin- 
guished and  described  it  ^,  and  has  shown,  that,  laying  down  the 
direction  of  motion  in  both  cases  by  curves,  and  bringing  the 
two  curves  together  by  their  faces,  they  coincide  almost  exactly, 
with  this  single  difference,  that  the  Hobarton  changes  precede 
those  at  Toronto  by  an  hour,  or  rather  more,  of  local  time. 

2910.  We  cannot  represent  this  day  effect  experimentally  upon 
two  such  needles  as  those  at  Hobarton  and  Toronto  by  owe  pole 
of  a  magnet,  though  we  can  do  it  with  each  separately  with  dif- 
ferent poles :  but  we  see  at  once  from  the  hypothesis,  the  rea- 
son why  the  sun  acts  in  this  manner  (2877-)3  ^'^^^  '^^  is  that 
the  region  of  influential  atmosphere  that  accompanies  him  in 
his  journey  round  the  globe,  acts  with  one  effect  in  the  northern 

'  Hobarton  Magnetical  Observations,  1850,  p.  xxxv. 


Oct.  1850.]       Diurnal  variation — direction.  245 

latitude  and  another  in  southern  positions  (2903.).  The  rea- 
sons  also  for  the  short  time  of  the  day  journey  and  the  lengthened 
period  of  the  night  return  (2904.),  are  manifest.  The  occurrence 
of  disturbances  or  secondary  waves  of  power  in  the  night  time, 
and  the  condition  both  of  the  chief  variation  and  the  subordinate 
oscillations  in  summer  and  winter,  will  be  considered  hereafter. 

2911.  Greenwich— The  following  results  are  taken  from  the 
volume  of  Greenwich  Observations  for  1847-  The  latitude  is 
51°  31'  N.,  and  being  removed  nearly  80°  in  longitude  from 
Toronto,  the  station  is  well  contrasted  with  it  and  also  with 
Hobarton.  The  mean  declination  is  22°  51'  18"  W.,  and  the 
mean  inclination  is  69°  N.  As  it  is  the  upper  end  of  the  dip- 
ping-needle which  we  have  to  consider  for  the  purpose  of  a  ready 
comparison  with  the  sun^s  observed  day  action  (2906.),  I  will 
describe  those  parts  of  its  course  and  place  for  Greenwich  time 
which  concern  us  now.  Moving  westward  before  19^  and  20^, 
it  then  returns  towards  the  east,  and  in  six  hours,  or  by  1^  or  2\ 
has  completed  the  great  sun  swing,  after  which  it  returns  west, 
following  the  luminary.  The  vertical  force  is  given  as  greatest 
between  3  and  4  o'clock,  and  least  between  11  and  13  o^clock. 
The  south  end  of  the  needle  therefore  is  more  upright  at  the 
former  time  and  less  at  the  latter;  and  as  the  latter  occurs  during 
the  prolonged  return  part  of  the  journey  from  east  to  west,  in- 
cluding the  night  hours,  so  we  perceive  that  the  upper  end  of 
the  needle  performs  its  daily  journey  in  an  irregular  closed  curve, 
which  the  ellipse  for  Toronto,  fig.  13  (2909.),  may  generally  re- 
present; it  passes  from  east  to  west  slowly  during  the  night 
hours,  approaching  the  equator  at  the  same  time,  and  then  it 
returns  from  west  to  east  with  far  greater  rapidity,  performing 
this  part  of  its  journey  at  a  greater  distance  from  the  equator 
and  nearer  to  the  pole. 

2912.  Washington,  U.S. — Latitude  38°  54'  N. ;  longitude 
77°  2'  W. ;  the  mean  declination  1°  25'  W. ;  the  mean  dip 
71°  20'  N.  The  south  or  upper  end  of  the  needle  is  in  the 
morning  at  extreme  west,  about  20  to  22  o'clock,  and  at  extreme 
east  about  2  o'clock ;  it  then  returns  slowly  west,  with  the 
night  action  as  in  former  cases,  regaining  extreme  west  at  20  to 
22  o'clock.  This  is  exactly  the  same  movement  for  declination, 
in  relation  to  the  place  of  the  sun,  as  for  the  former  localities. 
I  have  not  the  variation  of  the  dip,  but  theory  would  lead  one 


246 


Atmospheric  magnetism. 


[Series  XXVI. 


to  conclude  that  it  is  greatest  between  22  and  2  o'clock,  and 
least  in  the  evening  and  night  time.  The  total  amount  of  decli- 
nation variation  is  greatest  in  summer,  as  before,  being  9'*87  in 
July  and  only  4'  in  December.  The  greatest  difference  in  the 
earth's  temperature  is  also  in  July,  being  then  nearly  20^  Fahr., 
whereas  in  December  and  Januaiy  it  is  only  10°  Fahr.  The 
shortest  period  between  the  extreme  temperature,  including 
therefore  the  quickest  change  of  temperature,  is  from  16  or  18  to 
2  o'clock,  and  consequently  includes  noon.  All  these  conditions 
combine  to  produce  the  greatest  magnetic  action,  and  it  is  in  the 
direction  pointed  out  by  the  hypothesis. 

2913.  Lake  Athabasca. — Latitude  58°  41'  N.;  longitude  111° 
18'  W.  of  Greenwich;  mean  declination  28°  E.  The  ob- 
servations are  only  for  five  months,  but  as  the  position  is  in 
a  high  latitude  and  may  be  important  for  future  considerations, 
I  give  the  results  here.  The  extreme  western  position  of  the 
upper  end  of  the  needle  is  about  17  or  18  o'clock,  and  its  ex- 
treme eastern  position  about  1  or  2  o'clock ;  so  that  as  far  as 
declination  is  concerned,  the  action  of  the  sun  and  atmosphere 
is  as  in  former  cases.  The  amount  of  declination  variation  is 
very  great,  being  in  October  21'*32 ;  in  November  10'*8;  in 
December  9'-78  ;  in  January  16'-29,  and  in  February  14'-87. 

2914.  For^/Smjo5ow.— Latitude  61°  52' N.;  longitude  121°  30' 
W.  of  Greenwich;  mean  decHnation  38°  E.  These  observations 
are  only  for  two  months,  i.  e.  April  and  May  1844.  The  ex- 
treme western  place  of  the  upper  or  south  end  of  the  needle  was 
at  19  o'clock,  and  its  extreme  eastern  position  at  2  o'clock. 
The  result  therefore  is  in  perfect  accordance  with  the  preceding 
observations  and  conclusions.  The  amount  of  vai'iation,  as  given 
in  the  horizontal  plane,  is  very  large,  being  36'-26  in  April  and 
32'  in  May. 

2915.  St.  Peter sburyh.—LAndie  57'  N.;  longitude  30° 
15'  E.  of  Greenwich ;  mean  dechnation  6°  10'  W. ;  the  dip  70° 
30'  N.  The  observations  are  the  mean  of  six  years,  and  show 
that  the  upper  end  of  the  needle  is  extreme  west  in  regard  of 
noon,  about  19^  and  20^  for  the  months  of  March  to  August, 
and  that  for  the  other  months  there  is  a  western  position  about 
the  same  hours.  The  extreme  east  position  is,  for  all  the  months, 
about  half-past  1  o'clock,  so  that  the  sun's  effect  in  passing 
over  at  the  noon  period  is  as  in  former  cases.    The  greatest 


Oct.  1850.]       Diurnal  variation — direction.  247 

amount  of  variation  is  ll'-52  in  June;  in  winter  it  dwindles 
away  to  as  little  as  l'-77.  From  theory  the  dip  may  be  expected 
to  increase  during  the  day  hours  and  diminish  at  night. 

2916.  Thus  these  cases,  which,  including  the  chief  feature  of 
diurnal  variation  and  sun  action,  were  selected  as  a  first  and 
trial-test  of  the  hypothesis,  join  their  evidence  together,  as  far  as 
they  go,  in  favour  of  that  view  which  I  am  offering  for  their 
cause ;  nor  have  I  yet  found  any  instance  of  even  an  apparent 
contradiction  in  regard  to  the  sun  action.  They  assist  the  mind 
greatly  in  forming  a  precise  notion  of  the  mauner  in  which  the 
influence  of  the  sun  and  air  is  supposed  to  act,  not  only  in  simi- 
lar cases,  but  in  respect  of  other  consequences,  i.  e.  in  all  that 
properly  comes  under  the  term  of  atmospheric  magnetism;  I  will 
therefore  now  restate  more  particularly  the  principles  which,  ac- 
cording to  the  hypothesis,  govern  them,  in  hopes  that  I  may  be 
fortunate  enough  to  assist  in  developing  by  degrees  the  true  phy- 
sical cause  of  the  magnetic  variations  in  question. 

2917.  Space,  void  of  matter,  admits  of  the  transmission  of 
the  magnetic  force  through  it  (2787.  2851.).  Paramagnetic  and 
diamagnetic  bodies  either  increase  or  diminish  the  degree  in 
which  the  transmission  takes  place  (2789.).  This,  their  influ- 
ence, I  have  expressed,  for  the  time,  by  the  phrase  of  magnetic 
conducting  power,  and  I  think  have  given  sufficient  first  experi- 
mental evidence  of  the  existence  of  the  power  and  its  effects  in 
disturbing  the  lines  of  magnetic  force  (2843.).  The  atmosphere 
is,  by  the  oxygen  it  contains  (2861.  2863.),  a  paramagnetic  me- 
dium, and  has  its  conducting  force  greatly  diminished  by  eleva- 
tion of  temperature  (2856.)  and  by  rarefaction  (2782.  2783.),  as 
has  also  been  fully  proved  by  experiment.  The  sun  is  an  agent 
which  both  heats  and  rarefies  the  atmosphere,  and  in  its  diurnal 
course,  the  place  of  greatest  heat  and  rarefaction  must,  speaking 
generally,  be  beneath  it.  The  irregularities  in  the  condition  of 
the  earth's  surface  and  other  causes  do  produce  local  departures 
from  an  exact  relation  of  place,  but  they  probably  disappear 
partly,  if  not  altogether,  in  the  upper  regions  of  the  air. 

2918.  Assuming  that  the  air  under  the  sun  is  most  changed 
magnetically,  and  confining  the  attention  to  a  spot  where  the 
sun  is  vertical,  for  the  purpose  of  considering  the  condition  of 
the  atmosphere  there  and  at  other  parts  in  relation  to  it,  the  sup- 
position of  a  globe  of  air  over  the  spot  will  of  course  find  no  fit 


248 


Atmospheric  magnetism.       [Series  XXVI. 


application  (2877.).  We  are  first  to  suppose  the  sun  far  away 
and  the  atmosphere  in  a  mean  state  as  to  temperature,  and  then 
consider  the  sun  as  present  in  the  meridian  of  a  given  place ; 
and  it  is  the  degree  of  alteration  in  temperature  and  expansion 
of  the  air  beneath  and  around  the  place  of  the  sun,  and  the  man- 
ner in  which  the  change  comes  on  and  passes  away,  which  con- 
cern us.  In  relation  to  the  surface  of  the  earth,  that  alteration 
will  be  greatest  somewhere  beneath  the  sun,  and  will  diminish 
in  every  direction  around,  becoming  nearly  nothing  as  to  direct 
action  at  that  part  or  circle  of  the  earth  where  the  sun^s  rays  are 
tangent.  In  relation  to  elevation,  it  is  a  question  yet  whether 
the  effect  is  greatest  in  amount  at  the  surface,  diminishing  up- 
wards. As  regards  the  atmosphere,  it  must  of  course  end  with 
it,  though  as  respects  space  itself  (2851.),  a  reservation-thought 
may  arise.  With  regard  to  any  alteration  occasioned  by  the 
sun's  influence  in  the  opposite  hemisphere,  though  there  is  none 
produced  directly,  yet  indirectly  there  is  that  due  to  the  falling 
of  the  temperature  of  the  air,  from  the  condition  to  which  the  sun, 
whilst  above  the  horizon,  had  brought  it.  This  change  must 
be  more  tardy,  irregular  and  disturbed,  by  local  and  other  cir- 
cumstances, than  the  opposite  alterations  produced  by  the  direct 
influence  of  the  luminary ;  and  is  that  which  occasions,  by  the 
hypothesis,  the  second  maximum  or  minimum  or  other  recur- 
ring night  actions,  made  manifest  by  the  needle  in  the  hours 
when  the  sun  is  away. 

29J9.  The  lines  of  force  which  issue  from  a  magnet  are,  as  it 
were,  located  and  fixed  by  their  roots  in  a  way  well  understood 
experimentally  by  those  who  have  worked  upon  this  subject. 
In  the  same  manner  the  lines  which  issue  from  the  earth  more 
or  less  suddenly,  according  to  the  amount  of  inclination,  are  held 
beneath  by  a  force  of  location ;  and  because  of  the  unchanging 
action  of  the  earth  in  respect  of  atmospheric  effect,  are  restrained 
more  or  less  from  alteration  beneath  during  the  changing  action 
of  the  atmosphere.  This  fixation  in  the  earth  is  a  chief  cause 
of  certain  peculiarities  in  the  atmospheric  phaenomena  as  we  ob- 
serve them ;  and  is  productive  of  that  rotation  of  the  line  of  force 
about  the  mean  position  which  we  have  already  considered 
during  the  sun  swing,  and  shall  meet  with  again  under  the  ac- 
tion of  cold  air.  This  condition  of  fixation  at  the  lower  parts  of 
the  lines  of  force  occurs  at  every  station  where  there  is  any  dip 


Oct.  1850.]       Diurnal  variation — direction. 


249 


at  all,  and  gives  for  each  the  point  of  convergence  round  which 
the  motion  of  the  upper  end  of  the  needle  takes  place  (2909. 
2932.). 

2920.  So  the  atmospherCj  under  the  influence  of  the  sun,  Hes 
upon  the  earth  altered  most  at  the 
part  beneath  the  luminary.  It  has 
received  power  to  affect  the  lines  of 
magnetic  force  differently  to  the 
manner  in  which  it  affected  them  in 
the  sun's  absence.  It  has  become  a 
great  magnetic  lens,  able  to  refract 
the  lines,  and  the  manner  in  which 
it  does  so  appears  to  be  of  the  fol- 
lowing nature.  All  the  lines  pass- 
ing through  this  heated  and  ex- 
panded air,  surrounded  by  other 
air  not  so  much  heated,  will,  be- 
cause of  its  being  a  worse  magnetic 
conductor  than  the  latter  (2861.  " 
2862.),  tend  to  open  out  (280/.); 
and  the  mass  of  heated  air,  as  a 
whole,  will  assume  the  condition  of 
diamagnetic  polarity.  If,  therefore,  for  the  sake  of  simplicity, 
the  magnetic  and  astronomical  poles  of  our  earth  be  supposed 
as  coincident,  and  fig.  14  represent  a  section  taken  through  them 
and  the  place  of  the  sun,  then  N  and  S  will  be  the  magnetic 
poles,  and  the  different  curves  cutting  the  outline  of  the  circle 
will  sufficiently  represent  the  course  of  the  magnetic  lines  as 
they  occur  at  or  about  the  surface  of  the  earth,  H  being  the 
sun,  and  a  the  place  immediately  beneath  it,  which  is  also  coin- 
cident with  the  magnetic  equator.  By  this  diagram  we  shall 
have  an  illustration  of  the  hypothetical  effect  on  the  inchnation 
of  the  needle. 

2921.  Considering  the  point  a  first,  and  assuming  as  yet  that 
the  maximum  of  change  in  the  air  is  always  at  the  surface  of  the 
earth,  we  shall  find  that  there  the  lines  of  force  will  open  out, 
preserving  in  some  degree  their  parallel  or  concentric  relation. 
Consequently  a  magnetic  needle,  free  to  move  in  every  direction, 
and  therefore  taking  up  its  position  in  the  fine  of  force,  ought 
not,  if  placed  at  this  spot,  to  be  altered  in  its  position.    It  ought 


250 


Atmospheric  magnetism. 


[Series  XXVI. 


to  show  perhaps  a  diminution  of  magnetic  force  transmitted 
through  that  spot;  but,  for  the  reason  before  given  (2868.),  I 
conclude  it  would  indicate  a  greater  intensity,  the  increased 
power  thrown  upon  it  through  the  diminution  of  the  conducting 
power  of  the  air  in  that  place  causing  it  to  act  as  a  more  power- 
ful needle. 

2922.  Proceeding  to  a  point  b,  there  the  lines  of  force  have 
dip.  The  same  physical  effect  will  be  produced  upon  them  here 
as  before,  i.  e.  the  portions  in  the  atmosphere  will  open  out; 
but  neither  here  nor  in  the  former  case  will  they  continue  to 
have  the  same  curvature  as  before,  for  towards  and  in  the  earth, 
where  they  have  their  origin,  they  are  restrained  more  or  less 
from  altering  by  the  unchanging  action  of  the  eai'th  (2919.) ; 
whilst  at  their  more  advanced  parts,  as  at  c,  they  enter  into 
portions  of  the  atmosphere  which  are  nearer  to  the  most  intense 
lines  of  solar  action,  H  C,  probably  also  into  the  region  of  most 
intense  action,  and  also  into  space,  circumstances  which  cause 
more  displacement  of  the  lines,  tending  to  separate  by  the  ten- 
sion of  the  parts  altered  in  the  air,  than  can  happen  in  the  earth 
(2848.).  So  the  magnetic  line  of  force  at  b  will  not  move  par- 
allel to  itself,  but  being  inclined  a  certain  degree  to  the  horizon, 
when  in  the  normal  condition,  will  be  more  inclined,  i.  e.  will 
have  more  dip  given  to  it  by  the  presence  of  the  sun.  This  is 
the  fact  made  manifest  by  the  needle  when  indicating  the  posi- 
tion of  the  line  as  to  inclination  (2908.)  at  Hobarton,  Toronto 
or  elsewhere,  by  the  motion  of  its  upper  end ;  for  it  is  manifest 
that  whatever  happens  on  one  side  of  the  place  of  the  sun  and 
magnetic  equator,  when,  as  in  our  supposition  (2920.),  they 
coincide,  will  happen  on  the  other. 

2923.  The  case  may  be  more  simply  stated,  for  the  facility  of 
recollection,  by  saying  that  the  effect  of  the  sun  is  to  raise  the 
magnetic  curves,  over  the  equatorial  and  neighbouring  parts, 
from  their  normal  position,  in  doing  which  the  north  and  south 
dip  are  simultaneously  affected  and  increased. 

2924.  At  the  place  d  like  effects  on  the  inclination  must  be 
produced,  and  theoretically  it  should  be  affected  in  the  same 
direction  even  at  N.  and  S.  At  the  point  a  the  inclination  is 
supposed  to  be  not  at  all  altered,  but  going  either  north  or  south, 
the  changes  appear  and  increase.  It  is  not  probable  that  the 
maximum  alteration  will  be  at  N.  or  S.,  but  the  latitude  where 


Oct.  1850.]       Diurnal  variation — direction.  251 

it  will  occur  must  depend  upon  the  many  conjoined  circumstances 
that  belong  to  the  case  of  a  globe  round  which  a  magnetic  lens, 
such  as  I  have  endeavoured  to  describe,  is  continually  revolving. 

2925.  Instead  of  assuming  that  the  sun  is  at  H,  let  us  suppose 
that  we  are  looking  at  the  diagram  in  a  vertical  position  and 
towards  the  east ;  the  sun  coming  up  from  the  east  and  passing 
over  our  heads,  and  bringing  with  it  that  condition  of  our  atmo- 
sphere which  is  the  cause  of  the  change.  As  it  does  so,  all  the 
magnetic  curves  would  rise ;  the  inclination  would  increase  at 
h,  d,  and  every  place  where  there  was  any  beforehand,  in  opposite 
directions  on  the  two  sides  of  a ;  this  would  go  on  until  the  sun 
was  in  the  zenith,  and  then  as  it  passed  away  and  sank  behind 
us,  the  lines  would  draw  in  again  and  the  dip  diminish  to  what 
it  was  at  first.  The  maximum  of  dip  would  be  when  the  sun 
was  near  the  zenith,  and  the  minimum  when  he  was  quite  away. 

2926.  But  if  the  resultant  of  force  be  above  in  the  atmosphere 
(2937.)j  which  is  by  far  the  most  probable,  as  it  is  the  whole 
atmosphere  which  acts  by  heat  diamagnetically,  then  the  results 
would  be  modified ;  for  if  over  a,  the  lines  of  force  might  be 
depressed,  and  any  inclination  there  would  be  diminished ;  at  b 
it  might  not  for  the  moment  be  affected ;  whilst  in  higher  lati- 
tudes it  would  be  increased,  according  as  the  line  of  force  from 
the  resultant  in  the  atmosphere,  wherever  that  might  be,  fell 
outside  of  the  angle  formed  by  the  inclination  M'ith  the  horizon 
of  a  given  place  or  within  it.  St.  Helena,  the  Cape  of  Good 
Hope,  and  Hobarton,  furnish  instances  of  the  three  cases. 

2927.  At  the  same  time  the  total  force  would  undergo  a  change 
in  its  amount ;  that  transmitted  through  a  given  space  would  be 
least  when  the  sun  was  in  the  zenith,  and  most  when  he  was 
away  (2863.).  The  total  variation  in  the  force  should  be  greatest 
at  a,  and  diminish  from  thence  towards  north  and  south.  The 
daily  variations  of  the  inclination  are  so  imperfectly  known  to 
us  at  present,  that  we  cannot  say  how  far  the  natm'al  changes 
will  accord  with  these  expected  variations,  but  as  far  as  the 
observations  go  they  agree  with  the  theory. 

2928.  If  the  sun,  instead  of  being  over  the  equator,  is  at  a 
tropic  and  so  vertical,  for  instance,  over  b,  then  the  effects  will 
be  modified ;  and  the  resultant  still  being  assumed  as  above,  the 
hues  of  force  which  before  were  not  affected,  may  be  expected 
to  descend  and  lessen  the  inclination,  whilst  other  lines  in  higher 


252 


Atmospheric  magnetism.       [Series  XXVI. 


72 

t  1. 

Fig.  15. 

m 

0 

0 

c 

e 

i 
a, 

i 
a 

r 

t' 

\ 

a' 

i' 

of 

a' 

s 

& 

T 

o' 

latitudes,  which  before  were  increased  in  inclination,  may  now 
be  but  little  affected,  and  other  lines  in  still  higher  latitudes 
have,  as  before  their  inclination,  increased.  On  the  other  side 
of  the  equator,  the  tendency  of  the  lines  would  be  to  increase  in 
inclination. 

2929.  Proceeding  to  that  part  of  the  expected  change  of  posi- 
tion of  the  free  needle  which  produces  variations  of  declination, 
let  e  r  in  fig.  15  represent  the  sun's 
path  in  the  equator,  and  ^  c,  t^  d  the 
same  at  the  tropics ;  let  m  r  be  a 
magnetic  meridian,  and  a  a',  i  i',  o  o' 
places  of  equal  north  and  south  incli- 
nation on  opposite  sides  of  the  equa- 
tor.    The  curves  of  magnetic  force 
seen  in  front  in  fig.  14,  are  now  in 
the  plane  of  the  magnetic  meridian^ 
but  may  be  considered  as  rising  on 
opposite  sides  of  the  equator  and 
coalescing  over  it.    If  the  air  on  all 
sides  were  in  its  mean  condition  and 
the  sun  entirely  away,  these  curves  would  be  in  the  vertical 
plane  mr;  or  if  the  sun  near  midday  was  so  placed  that  the 
resultant  of  the  heated  and  changed  atmosphere  was  in  the 
meridian  m  r,  though  effects  of  incHnation  would  occur  (2922.), 
still  the  curves  would  remain  in  the  same  vertical  plane.    But  if 
the  resultant  were  either  to  the  east  or  the  west  of  m  r,  variations 
of  declination  would  be  produced.    For  suppose  the  sun  to  be 
advancing  from  the  east  or  r ;  because  it  gives  the  air  a  diamag- 
netic  condition,  the  lines  of  force  would  tend  to  expand  (2877-)> 
and  therefore  move  westward,  as  represented  in  the  meridian 
n  s ;  and  the  deflection  caused  thereby  would  be  greatest  upon 
the  surface  of  the  earth,  because  it  is  there  that  the  curves  as 
they  enter  the  earth  are  held  and  restrained  in  respect  of  their 
normal  position  (2919.).    As  the  warmed  atmosphere  came  on, 
the  western  deflection  would  increase  to  a  certain  extent,  and 
then  diminish  to  nothing  when  the  resultant  was  in  the  meridian ; 
but  as  the  latter  passed  on,  the  deflection  would  grow  up  on  the 
eastern  side  of  n  s,  and,  after  attaining  a  maximum,  would  di- 
minish and  cease  as  the  warm  air  retreated. 

2930.  If  the  sun's  path  was  in  the  northern  tropic,  t  c,  and 


Oct.  1850.]       Diurnal  vdriation-^direction. 


253 


the  resultant  in  the  atmosphere  therefore  to  the  north  of  the 
stations  a  or  i,  though  that  would  make  a  difference  in  the 
amount  of  the  decHnation  variation,  it  would  not  alter  its  direc- 
tion, for  still  the  curves  a  a'  and  i  i'  would  bear  to  the  west  as  the 
sun  came  up,  and  would  be  on  the  meridian  when  the  resultant 
was  there  also.  There  would  be  more  effect  produced  at  i  than 
at  i',  but  the  contrary  character  of  the  dip,  in  respect  of  the  sun's 
place,  would  not  alter  the  direction  of  the  declination  variation. 

2931.  A  cold  region  of  air  acting,  as  at  the  coming  on  of  night, 
upon  the  lines  of  magnetic  force  of  the  earth,  would,  by  virtue  of 
its  paramagnetic  character  (2865.),  produce  corresponding  effects 
both  of  inclination  and  declination,  but  in  the  contrary  direction. 

2932.  Thus  the  lines  of  force  which  issue  from  the  earth  at 
all  places  upon  its  surface  where  there  is  any  dip,  will,  by  the 
hypothesis,  under  the  daily  influence  of  the  sun,  describe  by 
their  ascending  parts  a  closed  curve  or  irregular  cone,  the  apex 
of  which  is  below.  As  a  fact  this  result  is  perfectly  well  known, 
but  its  accordance  with  the  hypothesis  is  important  for  the  latter. 
The  mean  position  of  the  free  needle  will  be  in  the  axis  of  this, 
curve  or  cone,  and  its  return,  either  in  declination  or  inclination, 
to  the  mean  is  an  important  indication  of  the  amount  and  position 
of  the  variable  forces  which  influence  it  at  such  times. 

2933.  My  hypothesis  does  not  at  all  assume  that  the  heated  or 
cooled  air  has  become  magnetic  so  as  to  act  directly  on  the 
needle  after  the  manner  of  a  piece  of  iron,  either  magnetically 
polar  or  rendered  so  under  induction.  There  is  no  assumed 
polarity  of  the  oxygen  of  the  air  other  than  the  conduction 
polarity  (2822.  2835.)  consequent  upon  a  slight  alteration  of  the 
direction  of  the  hnes  of  force.  The  change  in  the  magnetic 
conducting  power  causes  this  deflection  of  the  Hnes;  just  as  a 
worse  conductor  of  heat  introduced  into  a  medium  of  better 
conducting  power  disturbs  the  previous  equable  transfer  of  heat, 
and  gives  a  new  direction  to  that  which  is  conducted ;  or  as  in 
static  electricity,  a  body  of  more  or  less  specific  inductive  capacity 
introduced  into  a  uniform  medium  disturbs  the  equable  lines  of 
force  which  were  previously  passing  across  it. 

2934.  The  sole  action  of  the  atmosphere  is  to  bend  the  Hnes 
of  force.  The  needle  being  held  by  these  Hnes  and,  when  free, 
being  parallel  to  them,  changes  in  position  with  the  changes  of 
the  lines.    It  is  not  necessary  even  that  the  lines,  which  are 


254 


Atmospheric  magnetism.       [Series  XXVI. 


immediately  affected  in  direction  by  the  altered  air,  should  be 
those  about  the  needle,  but  may  be  very  distant.  The  whole  of 
the  magnetic  lines  about  the  earth  are  held  by  their  mutual 
tension  in  one  connected  sensitive  system,  which  has  no  slug- 
gishness anywhere,  but  feels  in  every  part  a  change  in  any  one 
particular  place.  There  may  be,  and  is  continually,  a  new 
distribution  of  force,  but  no  suppression.  So  when  any  change 
in  direction  happens,  near  or  distant,  the  needle  in  a  given  place 
will  feel  and  indicate  it,  and  that  the  more  sensibly  according  to 
the  vicinity  of  the  place  and  the  kind  of  change  induced ;  but 
the  disposition  of  the  whole  system  has  been  affected  at  the  same 
moment,  and  therefore  all  the  other  needles  will  be  affected  in 
obedience  to  the  change  in  the  lines  of  force  which  govern  them 
individually. 

2935.  The  needle  is  a  balance  on  which  all  the  magnetic  power 
around  a  given  locality  fastens  itself,  even  to  the  antipodes,  and 
it  shows  for  each  place  every  variation  in  their  amount  or  dispo- 
sition, whether  that  occurs  near  or  far  off.  Its  mean  position 
is  the  normal  position;  and  as  regards  atmospheric  changes, 
the  fixation  of  the  lines  of  force  in  the  earth  (2919.)  is  that  which 
tends  to  give  the  lines  a  standard  position  (exclusive  of  secular 
changes),  and  so  bring  them  and  the  needle  back  from  their 
disturbed  to  their  normal  state.  Hence,  whilst  considering  the 
causes  which  disturb  either  the  declination  or  the  inclination, 
arises  the  importance  of  keeping  in  mind  the  mean  position  or 
place  of  the  needle  (2932.),  and  not  merely  the  direction  in  which 
it  is  moving. 

2936.  So  the  well-known  action  of  the  sun  on  the  needle  is, 
by  my  hypothesis,  very  indirect ;  the  sun  at  a  given  place  affects 
the  atmosphere;  the  atmosphere  affects  the  direction  of  the 
lines  of  force  ;  the  lines  of  force  there  affect  those  at  any  distance, 
and  these  affect  the  needles  which  they  respectively  govern. 

2937.  I  have,  for  the  sake  of  convenience  in  considering  a 
special  action  of  the  atmosphere,  spoken  of  the  resultant  in  the 
atmosphere  dependent  on  the  sun's  presence ;  and  will  do  so  a 
little  while  longer  without  implying  any  direct  action  of  this 
resultant,  or  that  portion  of  air  which  yields  it,  upon  the  needle 
(2933.),  for  the  sake  of  considering  at  what  probable  height  it  is 
situated  in  the  air.  That  it  cannot  be  on  the  surface  of  the  earth, 
is  shown  by  the  depression  of  the  lines  and  diminution  of  the 


Oct.  1850.]       Diurnal  variation — direction. 


255 


dip  at  St.  Helena  and  Singapore  during  the  middle  of  the  day ; 
and  that  it  is  not  even  under  the  sun,  is  shown  by  the  manner 
in  which  the  greatest  action  precedes,  in  some  degree,  the  sun, 
as  at  Hobarton  and  Toronto,  and  other  places  by  different 
amounts  of  time ;  neither  the  time  when  the  sun  is  on  the  meri- 
dian, nor  the  time  when  the  observed  temperature  is  highest 
(for  that  is  after  the  sun),  is  the  time  of  greatest  action,  but  one 
before  either  of  these  periods.  The  changes  in  the  temperature 
of  the  air  produced  by  the  sun,  will  not  take  place  below  and 
above  at  the  same  time.  The  upper  regions  of  the  atmosphere 
over  a  given  spot  are  affected  by  the  sun  at  his  rising  and  after- 
wards, before  the  air  below  is  heated ;  and  therefore  the  effect 
from  above  would  be  expected  to  precede  that  below.  The 
temperature  observed  on  the  earth  does  not  show  us,  for  the 
same  time,  the  course  of  the  changes  above,  and  may  be  a  very 
imperfect  indication  of  them.  The  maximum  temperature  below 
is  often  two,  three,  or  four  hours  after  the  sun,  whereas,  whatever 
heat  the  sun  gives  by  his  rays  directly  to  the  atmosphere,  must 
be  acquired  far  more  rapidly  than  that.  It  is  very  probable, 
and  almost  certain,  that  at  4  or  5  o^clock  a.m.  in  the  summer 
months,  the  upper  regions  may  be  rising  in  temperature,  whilst 
on  the  surface  of  the  earth,  through  radiation  and  other  causes, 
it  is  falling.  The  well-known  effect  of  cold  just  before  sunrise 
in  some  parts  of  India,  and  even  in  our  country,  is  in  favour  of 
such  a  supposition.  We  must  remember  that  it  is  not  the 
absolute  temperature  of  the  air  at  any  spot  that  renders  it  influ- 
ential in  producing  magnetic  variations,  but  the  differences  of 
temperature  between  it  and  surrounding  regions.  Though  the 
upper  regions  be  colder  than  the  lower,  their  changes  may  be  as 
great  or  greater ;  they  happen  at  a  range  of  temperature  which 
is  probably  more  influential  than  a  higher  range  (296/.) ;  and, 
what  is  of  importance,  they  occur  more  quickly  and  directly 
upon  the  presence  of  the  sun.  The  quantity  of  heat  which  the 
atmosphere  can  take  directly  from  the  sun's  rays,  is  indicated  by 
the  diflerent  proportions  we  receive  from  him  when  he  is  either 
vertical  or  oblique  to  us,  and  so  sending  his  beams  through  less 
or  more  air ;  and  when  he  has  departed,  the  upper  parts  of  the 
air  are  far  more  favourably  circumstanced  for  rapid  cooling  by 
radiation  than  the  portions  below.  So  that  the  final  changes 
may  be  as  great  or  greater  than  below,  and  we  may  learn  little 


256 


Atmospheric  magnetism.       [Series  XXVI. 


of  them,  or  their  order,  or  time,  by  observations  of  temperature 
at  the  earth's  surface.  In  addition  therefore  to  observations  of 
magnetic  effect,  as  depression  of  the  Hnes  of  force  at  St.  Helena, 
&c.,  there  are  apparently  reasons  deducible  from  physical  causes, 
why  the  chief  seat  of  action  should  be  above  in  the  atmosphere. 

2938.  In  the  midday  effect  the  upper  end  of  the  needle  passes 
the  mean  position  (2935.)  on  its  return  to  the  east  generally 
before  the  sun  passes  the  meridian  going  vs'estward.  At  Toronto 
it  is  about  an  hour  in  advance  ;  at  St.  Helena  and  Washington 
an  hour  and  a  half;  at  Greenwich  and  Petersburgh  two  hours  ; 
at  Hobarton  and  the  Cape  of  Good  Hope  the  passage  is  about 
noon.  Such  results  appear  to  indicate  that  the  place  of  maximum 
action  is  in  advance  of  the  sun ;  and  it  probably  is  so  in  some 
degree,  but  not  so  much  as  at  first  may  be  supposed,  as  will 
appear  I  think  from  the  following  considerations. 

2939.  The  precession  of  the  time  of  maximum  action  may 
depend  in  part  upon  some  such  condition  as  the  following.  As 
the  sun  advances  towards  and  passes  over  a  meridian,  the  air  is 
first  raised  in  temperature  and  then  allowed  to  fall,  and  these 
actions  produce  the  differences  in  different  places  on  which  the 
magnetic  variations  depend.  But  they  depend  also  upon  the 
suddenness  with  which  or  the  vicinity  at  which  these  differences 
occur.  Thus  two  masses  of  air,  having  equal  differences  of 
temperature,  will  affect  the  lines  of  force  more  if  they  be  near 
together,  and  to  the  needle,  than  if  they  be  far  apart.  And  again, 
if  a  body  of  air  were  of  a  certain  low  temperature  at  one  part, 
and,  proceeding  horizontally,  were  to  increase  rapidly  to  a  certain 
high  temperature  and  then  diminish  slowly  to  the  first  low  tem- 
perature, such  a  body  passing  across  a  set  of  lines  of  magnetic 
force  would  affect  them  in  opposite  directions  at  the  fore  and  after 
part ;  but  it  would  affect  them  most  on  the  rapidly  altering  side. 

2940.  Now  the  air  as  heated  by  the  sun  must  be  in  this 
condition.  According  to  analogy  with  solid  and  liquid  bodies, 
being  exposed  to  heat  and  then  withdrawn,  the  changes  of 
temperature  that  it  would  undergo  would  be  more  rapid  in  the 
elevation  than  in  the  falling,  and  so  the  changes  in  the  pre- 
ceding would  be  more  rapid  than  in  the  following  parts.  To 
this  would  be  added  the  effect  of  the  atmosphere  warmed 
by  the  earth;  for  as  that  is  slower  in  attaining  heat,  as  is 
shown  by  the  time  of  maximum  temperature,  so  its  effects 


Oct.  1850.]       Diurnal  variation — direction.  257 

being  gradually  communicated  to  the  air  above,  as  the  sun 
passed  away,  would  tend  to  retard  its  fall  and  enlarge  the  dif- 
ference already  spoken  of.  Applying  these  considerations  to 
the  natural  -case,  the  strongest  effect  and  the  greatest  variation 
should  be  towards  the  west,  and  the  following  or  lesser  action 
towards  the  east  of  the  sun;  and  the  mean  condition  of  the 
needle  for  the  whole  change  would  be  in  advance  of  that  body. 

2941.  Mr.  Broun  has  made  observations  of  the  daily  variation 
at  different  heights,  namely,  at  Makerstoun  and  the  top  of  the 
Cheviot  Hills,  where  the  height  differs  by  nearly  half  a  mile, 
and  finds,  I  believe,  no  difference  in  the  intensity,  but  that  the 
progress  is  first  at  the  higher  station.  It  would  be  very  inter- 
esting to  have  an  observatory  up  above,  but  to  give  the  results 
required  it  should  have  air  and  not  solid  matter  beneath  it. 

2942.  There  is  another  circumstance  which  importantly  influ- 
ences the  times  of  the  passages  of  the  declination  variation.  If 
two  places  north  and  south  of  the  equator  have  equal  dip  and 
contrary  declinations,  i.  e.  if  both  their  upper  ends  point  east  or 
west,  then  the  effects  ought  to  correspond  and  form  a  pair.  But 
if  both  have  east  or  west  declination,  according  to  the  usual  mode 
of  marking  this  effect  by  the  north  end  of  the  magnet,  then  the 
variations  already  described  should  come  on  as  the  sun  passes 
midway  between  them,  but  there  should  be  a  difference  in  time. 
As  the  luminary  appears  and  approaches,  the  needles  a  and  b 
(fig.  16)  will  most  probably  be 

affected  together;  but,  as  he 
draws  nigh,  if  the  places  have 
eastern  declination,  the  one 
that  is  south  will  be  soonest 
affected,  and  for  the  time  most 
strongly,  but  will  in  a  period 
more  or  less  extended,  be  fol- 
lowed by  the  corresponding  w 
action  at  the  other  place.  For 
as  each  needle  will  have  return- 
ed from  the  first  half  of  its 
series  of  changes  to  0°  by  the 
time  the  sun  is  on  its  magnetic 
meridian,  and  as  it  will  arrive 
at  this  meridian,  as  regards  the 
VOL.  HI. 


258 


Atmospheric  magnetism.      [Series  XXVI . 


south  needle,  before  it  does  so  for  the  north  needle,  so  the  south 
magnet  should  precede  the  other  in  its  changes.  If  the  declina- 
tion of  both  were  westerly,  then  the  north  needle  would  precede 
the  south. 

2943.  The  hypothesis  advanced,  besides  agreeing  with  the 
facts  regarding  the  direction  of  the  needle's  motions,  as  is  the 
case  generally,  and  if  my  hopes  are  well-founded,  will  be  the 
case  also  in  more  careful  comparisons ;  should  also  agree  in  the 
amount  of  force  required  for  the  observed  declinations  at  given 
hours.  I  have  endeavoured  to  obtain  experimental  evidence  of 
the  difference  of  action  of  oxygen  and  nitrogen  on  needles  sub- 
jected to  the  earth's  power,  but  have  not  yet  succeeded.  This 
however  is  not  surprising,  since  a  saturated  solution  of  proto- 
sulphate  of  iron  has  failed  under  the  same  circumstances.  More 
delicate  apparatus  may  perhaps  yield  a  positive  result. 

2944.  That  small  masses  of  oxygen  should  not  give  an  indi- 
cation of  that  which  is  shown  by  the  atmosphere  as  a  whole  is 
not  surprising,  if  we  consider  that  the  mass  of  air  is  exceeding 
great,  and  includes  a  vast  extent  of  the  curves  on  which  it,  by 
the  hypothesis,  acts ;  and  yet  that  the  effect  to  be  accounted  for 
is  exceeding  small.  The  extreme  declination  at  Greenwich  is 
12',  equal  to  about  4'  24"  of  east  and  west  alteration  on  the  free 
needle,  so  that  that  is  the  whole  of  what  has  to  be  accounted  for. 
One  could  scarcely  expect  such  an  effect  to  be  shown  by  small 
masses  of  oxygen  and  nitrogen  acting  on  only  a  few  inches  in 
length  of  the  magnetic  curves  passing  through  them,  unless  one 
could  use  an  apparatus  of  extreme  and  almost  infinite  sensibility ; 
but  from  what  I  have  seen  of  oxygen  when  compared  at  dif- 
ferent degrees  of  dilution  (2780.),  or  at  different  temperatures 
(2861.),  I  am  led  to  believe  that  the  effects  on  it  produced  by 
the  sun  in  the  atmosphere  will  ultimately  be  found  competent 
to  produce  these  variations. 

2945.  Where  the  air  is  changed  in  temperature  or  volume, 
there  it  acts  and  there  it  alters  the  directions  of  the  lines  of 
force ;  and  these  by  their  tension  carry  on  the  effect  to  more 
distant  hues  (2934.),  whose  needles  are  accordingly  affected. 
The  transferred  effect  will  be  greater  or  less  according  as  the 
distances  are  less  or  greater,  and  hence  a  change  near  at  hand 
may  overpower  that  at  a  distance,  and  a  cloud  close  to  a  station 
may  for  the  moment  do  more  than  the  rising  sun.    These  are 


Oct.  1850.]     Diurnal  variation — Annual  variation. 


259 


the  irregular  variations ;  and  the  extent  of  their  influence  is  well 
shown  by  the  photographic  records  of  Greenwich  and  Toronto. 
The  volume  of  Greenwich  Observations  for  1847  contains  a  pho- 
tographic record  of  the  declination  changes,  February  18 — 19, 
1849.  Between  6  and  7  o'clock  there  is  a  variation  of  16'  occur- 
ring in  18  minutes  of  time,  or  at  the  rate  nearly  of  1'  for  each 
minute  of  time.  The  course  of  the  mean  variation  for  the  same 
date  and  time  is  l'-95  in  two  hours,  or  at  the  rate  of  1  second  for 
each  minute  of  time,  so  that  the  irregular  variation  (which  may 
be'  considered  as  a  local  variation  in  respect  of  the  sun's  povver 
for  the  time)  is  sixty  times  that  due  to  the  effect  of  the  great 
resultant ;  moreover  it  was  in  the  reverse  direction,  for  the  tem- 
porary variation  was  from  east  to  west,  whilst  the  mean  variation 
was  from  west  to  east. 

2946.  Another  mode  of  showing  how  much  the  action  of  nearer 
portions  of  the  atmosphere  may  overpower  and  hide  the  effect  of 
the  whole  mass,  is  to  draw  the  line  of  mean  variation  for  the 
twenty-four  hours  through  such  a  photographic  record  as  that  just 
referred  to,  and  then  it  will  be  seen  in  every  part  of  the  course  how 
small  the  mean  effect  on  the  needle  is,  compared  to  the  irregular 
or  comparatively  local  effect  for  the  same  moment  of  time.  The 
magnet  with  which  these  observations  were  made,  is  a  bar  of 
steel  2  feet  long,  1^  inch  broad  and  a  quarter  of  an  inch  thick, 
and  therefore  not  obedient  to  sudden  impulses;  it  is  probable 
that  a  short,  quick  magnet  would  show  numerous  cases  in  which 
the  irregular  variation  would  be  several  hundred  of  times  greater 
than  the  mean.  Still  all  these  irregularities  and  overpowering 
influences  of  near  masses  are  eliminated  by  taking  the  mean  of 
several  years'  observation,  and  thus  a  true  result  is  obtained,  to 
which  the  hypothesis  advanced  may  be  applied  and  so  tested. 


2947.  Returning  for  a  short  time  to  the  annual  variation 
(2882.),  I  may  observe,  that  it  has  been  a  good  deal  considered 
in  discussing  the  daily  variation.  The  arrangement  of  the  mag- 
netic effects  by  Colonel  Sabine  at  Hobarton,  Toronto,  St.  Helena 
and  elsewhere,  into  monthly  portions,  proves  exceedingly  in- 
:  structive  and  important,  especially  for  places  between  and  near 
the  tropics.  It  suppUes  that  kind  of  analysis  of  the  annual 
variation  which  is  given  by  the  hours  for  the  daily  variation. 


260 


Atmospheric  magnetism.      [Series  XXVI. 


Every  month,  by  a  comparison  of  its  curve  with  those  of  other 
months,  tells  its  own  story,  at  the  same  time  that  it  links  its 
predecessor  and  successor  together. 

2948.  1  shall  have  occasion  to  trace  these  monthly  means 
hereafter ;  but  in  the  meantime  refer  to  the  effect  of  the  sun's 
annual  approach  and  recession  indicated  by  these  means,  as 
according  with  the  hypothesis  in  respect  of  near  and  distant 
actions  (2945.).  Hobarton  and  Toronto  are  in  opposite  hemi- 
spheres, so  that  the  sun  whilst  approaching  one  recedes  from 
the  other,  and  the  amount  of  variations  therefore  changes  in 
opposite  directions.  Below  is  the  average  for  each  month,  de- 
rived in  the  case  of  Hobarton  from  a  mean  of  seven  years,  and 
in  that  of  Toronto  from  a  mean  of  two  years. 

Hobarton.    Lat.  42"  52'- 5  S.     Toronto,    Lat.  43"  39'-35  N. 


January 
February 
March 
April  . 
May  . 
June  . 
July 
August 
September 
October  . 
November 
December 


11-66  6-51 


11-80  6-40 

9-50  8-50 

7-  26  9-52 

4-56   10-34 

3-  70  Winter.    .    .  .11-99 

4-  61   12-70  Summer. 

5-  89   12-68 

8-  24   9-72 

11-  01  7*59 

12-  05  Summer    .    .    .  5*75 
n-81   4-47  Winter. 

The  jtwo  stations  are  in  latitudes  differing  only  47'  from  each 
other ;  and  the  extreme  difference  of  the  atmospheric  effect  be- 
tween summer  and  winter  differs  as  little,  being  at  Hobarton, 
which  has  the  highest  latitude,  8'-35,  and  at  Toronto  8'-23. 

2949.  According  to  Dove,  the  northern  hemisphere  is  warmer 
in  July  than  the  southern  hemisphere  by  17°'4  Fahr.,  and  colder 
in  winter  by  only  10^-7 ;  the  numbers  being  as  follows: — 


Northern  hemisphere  7l-0'l  ^30.3  ^j^^  ^^^^^^^  , 

53'6  J  ° 


July. 
January. 

The  mean  for  the  whole  year  is  59°-9  for  the  northern  hemisphere, 


Southern  hemisphere 

Northern  hemisphere  48'8~\  c^o.ic  i  i     i  , 

on  u  •  u  .Q.s  h54°-15  the  whole  globe. 
Southern  hemisphere  59-5  J  ° 


Oct.  1850.] 


Annual  variation. 


261 


and  56°-5  for  the  southern.  Therefore,  as  Dove  further  shows, 
the  whole  earth  is  in  July,  when  the  sun  is  shining  over  the  ter- 
raqueous parts,  8°  higher  in  temperature  than  in  January,  when 
it  is  over  the  watery  regions :  and  from  the  influence  of  the 
same  cause,  the  mean  of  the  southern  hemisphere  is  3°'4  below 
the  mean  of  the  northern  half  of  the  globe.  The  difference  be- 
tween January  and  July  is  for  the  northern  hemisphere  22°'2, 
and  for  the  southern  only  5°'9.  These  differences  are  so  pecu- 
liar in  their  arrangement  and  so  large  in  amount,  that  they 
rnust  have  an  effect  upon  the  distribution  of  the  magnetic  forces 
of  the  earth,  but  the  data  are  not  yet  sufficient  to  enable  one 
to  trace  the  results.  Sabine  indicates  a  probability  from  his 
analysis  of  observations,  that  the  sum  of  the  earth's  magnetic 
force  is  increased  in  intensity  when  the  sun  is  in  the  southern 
signs,  i.  e.  in  our  winter  (2891.).  I  should  have  expected  from 
theory  that  such  results  would  have  been  the  case,  at  least  in 
those  parts  where  the  dip  was  not  very  great ;  because  a  colder 
atmosphere  ought  to  conduct  the  lines  of  magnetic  force  better, 
and  therefore  the  systems  round  the  earth  ought  at  such  a  time 
to  condense,  as  it  were,  in  the  cooler  parts.  It  would  be  doubt- 
ful, however,  whether  the  needle  would  show  this  difference, 
,  because  the  lines  of  power  would  not  be  restrained  above,  as  in 
the  case  formerly  supposed  (2922.),  but  could  gather  in  from 
space  freely.  From  what  has  been  said,  however,  it  will  be  evi- 
dent that  such  a  conclusion  can  only  be  drawn  with  any  degree 
of  confidence  from  observations  made  pretty  equally  over  both 
hemispheres. 

2950.  If  we  should  ever  attain  a  good  knowledge  of  the  an- 
nual variation  for  several  stations  in  different  parts  of  both  hemi- 
'  spheres,  it  would  help  to  give  data  by  which  the  depth  at  which 
the  magnetic  power  is  virtually  situated  might  be  estimated;  for, 
as  this  power  is  expected  to  undergo  undulations  over  very  large 
portions  of  the  earth's  surface  by  the  annual  changes  of  tempe- 
rature (2884.),  so  they  would  differ  in  character  and  extent  ac- 
cording as  the  origin  of  the  lines  should  prove  to  be  more  or  less 
deeply  situated. 


2951.  With  regard  to  the  many  variations  of  magnetic  force, 
not  periodic  or  not  so  in  relation  to  the  sun,  which  yet  produce 


262  Atmospheric  magnetism.      [Series  XXVI. 

the  irregular  and  overruling  changes  already  referred  to  (2945.), 
dependent,  as  I  suppose,  on  local  variations  of  the  atmosphere, 
I  may  be  allowed  to  notice  briefly  such  points  as  have  occurred 
to  my  mind. 

2952.  The  varying  pressure  of  the  atmosphere,  over  a  given 
part  of  the  earth^s  surface,  ought  to  cause  a  variation  in  the  mag- 
netic condition  of  that  part  of  the  earth.  It  is  represented  to 
us  by  a  difference  of  3  inches  of  mercury,  or  one-tenth  of 
the  weight  of  the  atmosphere.  Now  the  oxygen  in  a  given 
space  is  paramagnetic  in  proportion  to  its  quantity  (2780.),  and 
therefore  it  does  not  seem  possible  that  that  quantity  over  a 
given  space  of  the  earth's  surface,  whether  it  be  recognized  by 
volume  as  above,  or  by  weight  as  in  a  given  volume  at  the  earth's 
surface,  should  be  varied  to  the  extent  of  one-tenth  of  the  whole 
sum  without  producing  a  corresponding  alteration  in  the  distri- 
bution of  the  magnetic  force;  the  lines  being  drawn  together  and 
the  force  made  more  intense  by  an  increase  of  the  quantity  or  of 
the  barometric  pressure,  and  the  reverse  effects  produced  at  the 
occurrence  of  diminished  pressure. 

2953.  At  any  spot  which  is  towards  the  confines  of  that  space 
where  the  air  is  increasing  or  diminishing  in  pressure,  there 
will  probably  occur  variations  in  the  directions  of  the  lines  of 
force,  and  these  will  be  more  marked  at  such  places  as  happen 
to  be  between  two  others,  in  one  of  which  atmosphere  is  accu- 
mulating, whilst  from  the  other  it  is  retreating.  Whether  these 
changes  (which  I  think  must  occur)  produce  by  vicinity,  effects 
large  enough  to  become  sensible  in  our  magnetic  instruments, 
is  a  question  to  be  resolved  hereafter.  To  suggest  the  cause  is 
useful,  because  to  know  of  the  existence,  nature,  and  action  of  a 
cause,  is  important  to  the  arrangement  of  the  best  means  of  ob- 
serving and  evolving  its  effects. 

2954.  Winds  and  large  currents  of  air  above  may  often  be 
accompanied  by  magnetic  changes  if  they  endure  for  a  time 
only.  A  constant  stream  like  the  trade-wind,  may  have  a  con- 
stant effect ;  but  if,  when  the  arrangement  of  the  hues  of  mag- 
netic force  through  the  atmosphere  is  in  a  given  state  con- 
sequent upon  the  condition  of  the  atmosphere  at  that  time,  a 
wind  arises  which  mixes  regions  of  cold  and  warm  air  together, 
or  makes  the  air  more  dense  in  one  region  than  another,  or  pro- 
ceeding from  one  to  another,  balances  regions  which  before  were 


Oct.  1850.] 


Irregular  variatiom. 


263 


in  different  conditions,  then  every  such  change  will  be  accom- 
panied by  a  corresponding  change  in  the  disposition  of  the  mag- 
netic force,  to  which  we  may  perhaps  hereafter  be  able  to  refer 
by  means  of  our  instruments.  Even  tides  in  the  air  ought  to 
produce  an  eflfect,  though  it  may  be  far  too  small  to  be  rendered 
sensible. 

2955.  The  precipitation  of  rain  or  snow  is  a  theoretical  reason 
for  the  change  of  magnetic  relations  in  the  space  where  it  takes 
place;  because  it  alters  the  temperature  where  such  precipita- 
tion occurs,  and  relieves  it  from  a  quantity  of  diluting  diamag- 
netic  or  neutral  matter.  A  chilling  hail-storm  might  affect  the 
needle  in  a  summer's  day.  Clouds  may  have  a  sensible  influence 
in  several  ways;  acting  at  one  time  by  their  difference  from 
neighbouring  regions  of  clear  air,  and  at  other  times  by  absorb- 
ing the  sun's  rays,  and  causing  the  evolution  of  sensible  heat  at 
different  altitudes  in  the  atmosphere  at  different  places,  or  pre- 
venting its  evolution  more  or  less  at  the  surface  of  the  earth. 
Those  masses  of  warmer  or  colder  air  of  which  meteorologists 
speak,  which  being  transparent  are  not  sensible  to  the  eye,  will 
produce  their  proportionate  effect.  And  hypothetically  speaking, 
it  is  not  absolutely  impossible  that  the  hot  and  partially  deoxy- 
genated  air  of  a  large  town  like  London,  may  affect  instruments 
in  its  vicinity ;  and  if  so,  it  will  affect  them  differently  at  dif- 
ferent times,  according  to  the  direction  of  the  wind. 

2956.  If  one  imagines  on  the  surface  of  the  earth  a  spot  which 
shall  represent  the  resultant  there  of  the  atmospheric  actions 
above,  and  can  conceive  its  course  as  it  wanders  to  and  fro, 
under  the  influence  of  the  various  causes  of  action  which  have 
been  in  part  referred  to,  whilst  it  still  travels  onwards  with  the 
sun,  one  may  have  an  idea  of  the  manner  in  which  it  may  affect 
the  various  observatories  scattered  over  the  earth.  I  believe 
that  its  course,  as  regards  the  east  and  west  direction  of  its 
wanderings,  is  partly  told  in  the  photographic  registerings  of 
Greenwich  and  Toronto,  being  there  mingled  in  effect  with  other 
causes  of  variation.  This  spot  may  be  concentrated  or  diffuse; 
it  may  pass  away  and  reappear  elsewhere ;  there  may  even  be 
two  or  more  at  once  sufficiently  strong  to  cause  vibrations  of  the 
needle  between  them. 

2957.  The  aurora  borealis  or  australis  can  hardly  be  indepen- 
dent of  the  magnetic  constitution  of  the  atmosphere,  occurring 


264 


Atmospheric  magnetism.       [Series  XXVI. 


as  it  does  within  its  regions,  and  perhaps  in  the  space  above. 
The  place  of  the  aurora  is  generally  in  those  latitudes  the  air  of 
which  has  a  distinct  magnetic  relation,  by  difference  of  tempera- 
ture and  quantity,  to  that  at  the  equator,  and  the  magnetic  cha- 
racter both  of  the  aurora  and  of  the  medium  in  which  it  occurs 
ties  them  together ;  therefore,  to  be  aware  of  and  to  understand 
in  some  degree  the  latter,  will  probably  direct  us  to  a  better  com- 
prehension of  the  former.  The  aurora  is  already  connected  with 
magnetic  disturbances  and  storms;  it  may  in  time  connect  them 
with  changes  in  the  atmosphere  in  a  manner  not  at  present  an- 
ticipated, and  as  the  suggestion  is  founded  upon  principle  it  seems 
deserving  of  consideration. 

2958.  Can  the  magnetic  storms  of  Humboldt  be  due  to  atmo- 
spheric changes?  This  is  a  question  on  which  1  would  offer  the 
following  observations.  Supposing  a  magnetic  rest  in  the  at- 
mosphere, and  that  all  local  or  irregular  variations  remained  un- 
changed for  the  time,  then  if  a  change  happened  in  one  place  it 
would  be  felt  instantly  everywhere  else  over  the  whole  earth, 
and  in  proportion  to  the  distance  from  the  place  of  change.  It 
would  be  felt  instantly,  because  the  impulse  would  not  be  con- 
veyed chiefly  or  importantly  through  the  matter  of  the  earth  or 
air,  but  through  the  space  above,  for  the  lines  there  are  affected 
by  changes  in  that  part  of  them  M'hich  passes  through  the  at- 
mosphere, and,  as  I  conceive,  would  affect  the  other  lines  in  space 
round  our  globe,  which  would  in  turn  affect  those  parts  of  their 
lines,  which,  passing  downwards  to  the  earth,  govern  the  needles 
below.  In  space,  I  conceive  that  the  magnetic  lines  of  force,  not 
being  dependent  on  or  associated  with  matter  (2787-  2917.), 
would  have  their  changes  transmitted  with  the  velocity  of  light, 
or  even  with  that  higher  velocity  or  instantaneity  which  we  sup- 
pose to  belong  to  the  hues  of  gravitating  force,  and  if  so,  then  a 
magnetic  disturbance  at  one  place  would  be  felt  instantaneously 
over  the  whole  globe. 

2959.  But  the  difficulty  is  to  conceive  an  atmospheric  change 
sufficiently  extensive  and  sudden  to  make  itself  perceived  every- 
where at  the  same  time  amongst  the  comparatively  local  varia- 
tions that  are  continually  occurring.  Still,  if  there  were  a  lull 
in  these  disturbances  by  the  opposition  of  contrary  actions  or 
otherwise  for  the  same  moment  of  time  at  two  or  more  places, 
those  places  might  show  a  simultaneous  effect  of  disturbance, 


Oct.  1850.] 


Magnetic  storms. 


265 


and  that  even  when  the  cause  might  be  very  little  or  not  at  all 
sensible  in  the  place  where  it  occurred.  A  simultaneous  change 
over  an  area  of  600  or  800  miles  in  diameter,  might  produce  less 
alteration  in  the  middle  of  that  area  than  at  the  extremities  of 
radii  of  1000  miles. 

2960.  It  becomes  a  fair  question  of  principle  to  inquire  how 
far  masses  of  the  air  may  be  moved  by  the  power  of  the  mag- 
netic force  which  pervades  them.  When  two  bulbs  of  oxygen 
in  different  states  of  density  are  subjected  to  a  powerful  magnet 
with  an  intense  field  of  force,  the  mechanical  displacement  of 
one  by  the  other  is  most  striking.  Whether  in  nature  the 
enormous  volumes  of  air  concerned,  and  the  difference  in  inten- 
sity of  the  earth's  magnetic  force  at  the  different  latitudes  where 
these  may  be  supposed  to  be  located,  combined  with  the  differ- 
ence of  temperature,  are  sufficient  to  compensate  for  the  small 
portions  of  oxygen  in  the  air  and  the  smaller  variations  in  den- 
sity, is  a  matter  that  cannot  at  present  be  determined.  The 
differential  result  of  motion,  as  has  been  shown,  is  very  great 
where  the  direct  result,  as  of  compression,  is  not  merely  very 
small  but  nothing  (2774.  2750.),  and  the  atmosphere  is  a  region 
where  the  differential  action  of  enormous  masses  is  concerned. 

2961.  Now  in  the  matter  of  difference  of  intensity,  Gay-Lus- 
sac  and  Biot  conclude  from  their  observations',  that  the  mag- 
netic force  is  the  same  at  a  height  of  four  miles  as  at  the  surface 
of  the  earth.  M.  Kupffer,  however,  draws  from  Gay-Lussac's 
results  the  conclusion,  that  there  was  a  little  diminution,  and 
Professor  Forbes,  from  his  experiments  made  in  different  parts 
of  Europe^  concludes  that  there  is  a  decrease  of  the  force  up- 
wards. Such  decrease  may  be  a  real  consequence  due  to  the 
difference  of  distance  from  the  source  of  the  terrestrial  magnetic 
force;  or,  as  is  more  hkely,  it  may  be  due  to  the  different 
proportions  of  oxygen  there  and  at  the  surface  of  the  earth. 
According  to  Gay-Lussac's  account  of  the  air  brought  from 
above,  it  was  as  0-5  to  1*0,  compared  with  the  density  below. 
Hence  the  paramagnetic  power,  added  to  space  in  the  place 
above,  from  whence  the  air  was  taken,  would  not  be  more 
than  one-half  of  that  added  by  the  presence  of  the  denser  atmo- 
sphere below.    This  I  think  ought  to  make  a  change  in  the  dis- 

'  Annales  de  Chimie,  Ann.  xiii.  vol.  lii.  p.  86. 
^  Edin.  Phil.  Trans.  1836,  vol.  xiv.  p.  25. 


266  Atmospheric  magnetism,      [Series  XXVI. 

tribution  of  the  magnetic  force ;  it  would  almost  certainly  do  so 
at  the  equator,  where  the  lines  of  force  are  parallel  to  the  gene- 
ral direction  of  the  atmosphere  (2881.) ;  and  I  think  it  would 
do  so,  as  to  the  horizontal  component,  in  the  latitude  where 
Gay-Lussac  and  Biot  made  their  aerial  voyages.  It  is  also  just 
possible  that  the  observers  may  have  been  in  such  relation  to 
the  heated  or  cooled  air  about  them  as  to  have  had  the  difference 
observed  produced,  or  rather  affected,  by  some  of  the  circum- 
stances just  described  (2951.). 

2962.  Whether  the  result  obtained  by  Gay-Lussac  and  Biot 
indicate  a  change  of  power  due  to  distance  or  not,  this  we  know, 
that  there  are  great  changes  from  the  magnetic  equator  toward 
the  north  and  south ;  and  that,  as  Humboldt  and  Bessel  say, 
it  is  doubled  in  proceeding  from  the  equator  to  the  western  limits 
of  Baffin^s  Bay.  And  when  so  little  as  one-third  of  a  cubic  inch 
of  oxygen  can  exert  a  force  equal  to  the  tenth  of  a  grain,  subject 
to  the  action  of  our  poM'erful  magnet,  we  may  well  conceive  that 
the  enormous  sum  of  oxygen  present,  in  only  a  few  miles  of  heated 
or  cooled  atmosphere,  can  compensate  for  the  great  difference  of 
magnetic  force,  andso  by  achangeof  place,  cause  currents  or  winds 
having  their  origin  in  magnetic  power.  In  such  a  case  we  should 
have  a  relation  of  magnets  to  storms ;  and  the  magnetic  force  of 
the  earth  would  have  to  do  with  the  mechanical  adjustments  and 
variations  of  the  atmosphere,  sometimes  causing  currents  which 
without  it  might  not  exist,  and  at  other  times  opposing  those 
which  might  else  arise,  according  as  the  great  differential  rela- 
tions by  which  it  would  act  (2757-)  should  combine  with  or  op- 
pose the  other  natural  causes  of  motion  in  the  air.  Such  move- 
ments would  react  upon  the  magnetic  forces,  so  that  these  would 
readjust  themselves,  and  so  there  would  be  magnetic  storms, 
both  material  and  potential,  in  the  atmosphere,  as  there  are  sup- 
posed to  be  of  the  latter  kind  in  the  earth. 

2963.  In  bringing  this  communication  to  a  close,  I  have  to 
express  my  obhgations  to  two  kind  and  able  friends.  Colonel 
Sabine  and  Professor  Christie,  for  the  interest  they  have  taken 
in  the  subject,  and  on  the  part  of  the  former  for  the  extreme 
facilities  afforded  me  in  the  use  of  observations  and  the  data  de- 
rived from  them;  but  in  doing  so  I  must  be  careful  not  to  convey 
any  idea  that  they  are  at  all  responsible  for  the  peculiar  views 
I  have  ventured  to  put  forth.  I  may  well  acknowledge  that  much 


Oct.  1850.]  Atmospheric  magnetism. 


267 


which  I  have  written  has  been  upon  very  insufficient  considera- 
tion ;  but  hoping  that  there  might  be  some  foundation  of  truth 
in  the  account  of  the  physical  cause  of  the  variations  which  I 
have  ventured  to  suggest,  I  have  not  hesitated  to  put  it  forth, 
trusting  that  it  might  be  for  the  advantage  of  science.  The  mag- 
netic properties  and  relations  of  oxygen  are  perfectly  clear  and 
distinct,  and  are  established  by  experiment  (2774.  2780.) ;  and 
it  is  no  assumption  to  carry  these  properties  into  the  atmosphere, 
because  the  atmosphere,  as  a  mere  mixture  of  oxygen  and  ni- 
trogen, is  shown  to  possess  them  also.  (2862.)  ^  It  varies  in  its 
magnetic  powers,  by  causes  which  act  upon  it  under  natural  cir- 
cumstances, and  make  it  able  to  produce  some  such  effects  as 
those  I  have  endeavoured  generally  to  describe. 

2964.  If  it  be  a  cause,  in  part  only,  of  the  observed  magnetic 
variations,  it  is  most  important  to  identify  and  distinguish  such 
a  source  of  action,  even  though  imperfectly ;  for  the  attention  is 
then  truly  and  intelligently  directed  in  respect  of  the  action  and 
the  pheenomena  it  can  produce.  The  assigned  cause  has  the  ad- 
vantage of  occurring  periodically  and  for  the  same  periods,  as  a 
large  class  of  the  effects  supposed  to  be  produced  by  it ;  and  if 
the  agreement  should  appear  at  first  only  general,  still  that 
agreement  will  greatly  strengthen  its  claim  to  our  attention.  It 
has  the  advantage  of  offering  explanations  and  even  suggestions 
of  many  other  magnetic  events  besides  those  which  are  periodical, 
and  it  presents  itself  at  a  time  when  we  have  no  clear  knowledge 
of  any  other  physical  cause  for  the  variations,  but  are  constrained 
vaguely  to  refer  them  to  imaginary  currents  of  electricity  in  the 
air  or  space  above,  or  in  the  earth  beneath. 

2965.  The  causes,  both  of  the  original  power  and  of  its  secu- 
lar variations,  are  unknown  to  us.  But  if,  accepting  the  earth 
as  a  magnet,  we  should  be  able  to  distinguish  largely  between 
internal  and  external  action,  and  so  separate  a  great  class  of 
phaenomena  from  the  rest,  we  should  be  enabled  to  define  more 
exactly  that  which  we  require  to  know  in  both  directions,  should 
be  competent  to  state  distinctly  the  problems  which  need  solu- 
tion, and  be  far  better  able  to  appreciate  any  new  hints  from  na- 
ture respecting  the  source  of  the  power  and  the  effects  that  it 
presents  to  us. 

2966.  The  magnetic  constitution  of  oxygen  seems  to  me  won- 
'  Philosophical  Magazine,  1847,  vol.  xxxi.  pp.  406,  409. 


268 


Atmospheric  magnetism.      [Series  XXVI. 


derful.  It  is  in  the  air  what  iron  is  in  the  earth.  The  almost 
entire  disappearance  of  this  property  also,  when  it  enters  into 
combination,  is  most  impressive,  as  in  the  oxynitrogens  and  oxy- 
carbons,  and  even  with  iron,  which  it  reduces  into  a  condition 
far  below  either  the  metal  or  the  oxygen,  weight  for  weight. 
Again,  its  striking  contrast  with  the  nitrogen,  which  dilutes  it, 
impresses  the  mind,  and  by  the  difference  recalls  that  which  also 
exists  between  them  in  relation  to  static  electricity  (1464.)  and 
the  lightning  flash.  Chlorine,  bromine,  cyanogen  and  its  con- 
geners, chemically  speaking,  have  no  magnetic  relation  to  oxy- 
gen. In  nature  it  stands  in  this  respect,  as  in  all  its  chemical 
actions,  alone. 

2967.  There  is  much  to  do  with  oxygen  relative  to  atmospheric 
magnetism.  Its  proportion  of  paramagnetic  force  at  different 
temperatures  and  different  degrees  of  rarefaction,  will  require 
to  be  accurately  ascertained,  and  this  1  hope  to  effect  by  a  torsion 
balance,  in  course  of  construction  (2783.).  Indeed,  I  hope  that 
this  great  subject  may  be  largely  touched  and  tried  by  experi- 
ment as  well  as  by  observation,  and  therefore  gladly  make  it 
part  of  these  experimental  researches. 

2968.  One  can  scarcely  think  upon  the  subject  of  atmospheric 
magnetism  without  having  another  great  question  suggested  to 
the  mind  (2442.),  What  is  the  final  purpose  in  nature  of  this 
magnetic  condition  of  the  atmosphere,  and  its  liability  to  annual 
and  diurnal  variations,  and  its  entire  loss  by  entering  into  com- 
bination either  in  combustion  or  respiration  ?  No  doubt  there 
is  one  or  more,  for  nothing  is  superfluous  there.  We  find  no  re- 
mainders or  surplusage  of  action  in  physical  forces.  The  small- 
est provision  is  as  essential  as  the  greatest.  None  are  deficient, 
none  can  be  spared. 

Royal  Institution, 
September  14,  1850. 

APPENDIX. 

Received  November  12,  1850. 
The  following  Tables  of  data  obtained  at  Toronto,  St.  Peters- 
burgh,  Washington,  Lake  Athabasca  and  Fort  Simpson,  supplied 
to  me  by  the  kindness  of  Colonel  Sabine,  have  not  yet  been  pub- 
lished. The  data  for  Hobarton  and  Greenwich  are  in  the 
volumes  of  observations  for  those  stations. 


d        w^vO  vis  MD  VO  CO  CO 


CO 


•  ro  V)  Vj-  r*-!  Vo  Vj-  Vj-      V<        S  D 


X) 

I— t 


■  O  O  O  O  OO 
oo  t-^      ii  _ 

■  io  i/^  b\      O  O 


t1-  0\  1-1  O  N  oo  « 

ly-lVO    W^VO    O  O 

"  I  oo  t^vb 


o 


oo  c^oo  o  d 
^  Oi  c»i  r)  O  O 
•  lo       On  b  r1 


ON  ■+  O  M  O 
cn  CO  *o 


■+00 
Vh  i^oo 


00  rt*  M  ON^O 
O   1-1  CO  O  00  M 

b      Vi      Vo  M  vb 


C7\  o  00 

CO  M 


00  ^  o  ^  d  Tj-ij-ocj\0  "-1M 

00    Cni-1    ■^O  COl^O  0\00 

-  CO  Vt-       OS  I"  >-i  b  c»  On  ri-  CO 

M  Hi     tH  M 


0000  lococ-^O  ^»^c<ir^O\0 
CO  00   On  000   C?\0O  ^ 


-  '-^h  coo  60 


r^KQ  00  OQ  ^  CO 


t^r--^l-ci  0*0  t>.co  t>.'sO  M  vo 

00    O    COOO    IH    CO  COOO    C-^  M    U-)  U-i 

-  CO  '^vb  t--  t--'^  r-.  *o  '=i*_5^ 

roTj-uou-»rl  C^c^  w->coonO  ^ 
vo  u-i  u-ivo  t---  CO  -"^j-vo  1000  00  O 

^  CO  CO^O    t^v>0  VO  VQ  CO  CO 

c<  w  r»  O        C\"0  t-*  O  0>> 

■"^-oo  ri-cocJ  u-iovovo  c^  t-^r}- 

CO  CoOd  C^»0    t-^  10  CO  CO 


vo 

vo 


c*^  O  CO  ^  t-^yD  M  to  O  10  O 


.  CO  ^VO    l>.  C^VO    t--00  >J-)  t;J- 


vo  to^o  vo  On  t^oo  O  00  00  vo  00 
p  '^oo  vp  T^oo  5^  p 
"  V  '-d-vb  'f'^  K-vb  i-^oo       w-i  '^j- 


O\C\t^0vOVO  HI  M  coco  to 
ro^o  ^vo  covo  CO  "j-loo  vo  to  On 

V  'i-vb  K.  t^vb  V>-oo  V--  Vo  to  Vj- 


to  ^  o      "^vo      r--  t}-vo  o 
to  tJ-vo  "h  r^vo  CO  onoo  t>-  r-^vo 

^  ^vb  t^vb  vb  vb  oo  t-^  to  ui  V}- 


CO  Cl  CO  tooo 
tJ-  O  vo  O 


O  M  to       cl  vo 

M    CO  O  VO    ON  M 


rj-  ^  ^  r--VO  vo  vo  00  »0  tJ- 


CO  11 
M   f--  ro 


CO  CO  ON  ON 

tooo  cooo  00 


■  CO  CO  ^VQ  VQ  vo    to  f-sVO  CO 


On  CO  N  ^00 
00  t-^oo  w  o 


to  O  O  00  Ti-vo  O 
^  N  vo  t^oo  On  CO 


C»    CO  tOVO    ^  ^  t^VO    CO  CO  CO 


00  *-* 
c<  On 


O  C*  M 
•3N  M  W 

'ci  lo 


*^oo  d  tJ-vo  f  vo 
CO  o\  w  o  O  ON 

^  co\0  vo   CO  Vl 


M     «  CO 


cooo   O   O  00 

vo  M    VOVO  CO 

c)  c)  '-J-  c» 


CO 


On  cl 
^  O  ^ 


OOP 


^  M  d  eo 

ONOO  vo    C\  CO 

b  b  'm  Vi  1-1 


^  vo- 
c)  w 

M 

COVO 

"  b 


O  vo 
O  O 


O  VO  O 
O   1-1  d 


cl  O  COVO  w 
O   O        t-^  CO 


^  O 
CO  O 


00000000000  O 


o  o 
o  o 


woo 
000 


0000  o 


O  0\  c  o  o 
p  p  p  p  p 

b  b  b  b  b 


o  00 

O  I- 

b  b 


r}-  vnvo 

■4-  a  i-i 


CO  IH  cooo  VN  o 
CO         M    O  Cl 


~0  0i-'>-i'-''-i'-i>-i000 


^  a,  «  3  "3  3  &  u  o  S 
1^  <l  li^  i-j  Hi  <!  V)  O  I?'.  Q 


i  a 


CO 
CO 


O) 

i-s 

o 

(M 
CO 


O 


a 


O 

.  i-H 

§  S 

%  2 

^  o 

.S 

a 


o 
CI 


•  I-H 

a  CO 

°  G 

fl  ^ 
O 
•43 

•  hH 

> 

a 

3 


a 


00 

b 


vo 
b 


rH    ^  *^ 

i-sCmg«i<^t-,i-,-s;(/jO!SP 


00 


coovO  1-1  O  wit--rl  1^00  cl  "I  ^ 
tJ-  CO  tovo  »>->vo       ^i-  CO  CO  vn 

b  b  b  b  b  b  b  b  b  b  b  b  b 

vo  vo  tovo  dOvcocotHMOt-i  O 
poopwi-ii-iCTv>-'t--.>-iO0O  M 

MQl-IMtHlHOMIHMlHb  M 

tJ-  ov  o  vo  O       Ti-vo  vn  10  CTsvo  CO 

Ot^Ol-^COCOHiclOClHCXJVO  M 
WOMMMMtHMMMb  O  M 
•5J-0  VOCOO\t-~.COVO'«}-^Tj-Ti- 

'^t~~OvOOp)OrlvoO>-ico  a\ 
000»-ti-iiHt-t»-tiHM0b  b 

vo  0>  w  O  >-<  t^oo  CJvoo  v/^  c) 

COVO  OOOVHI-tOOOC100"tj-M 

obooHwoMMbbb 

i-i^cJOi-icioovn  vooo  O 

d   Tj-vO  OOOi-iOOOOvvoOO 

b  b  b  b  i-i  M  b     b  b  b  b 

M  O  00  w  Cvoo       o  o\ 

f    5^    r^f^P    OOOOOVO    COO  O 

b  b  b  b  M  H  b  b  b  b  b  b 

00  Ovovo  -^v-it^^unc)  r^oo  ■+ 
d  CO  'i-^p  pooooovonoo 

o  b  b  b  M  'w  b  b  b  b  b  b 

coMvo  O  D  coco^r^r)  o 

CO  ^  ^vo    ONOOOt^vOdMM  10 

o  o  b  b  b     b  b  b  b  b  b  b 

vo  -d-  o  "-i  Cvoo  00  CO  u-i  CO  d  c4 
vovp  00  pv  t-^  CO  c^  d 

b  b  b  b  b  b  b  b  b  b  b  b 

00  00  ■^t-^Mvo  ino  O  woo 
m      >j->vo  00  CTvvo  vo       "4-  o  d 

b  b  b  b  b  b  b  b  b  b  b  b 

^  in  CO  0,vO  OVO-sJ-Qvow-^ 
in      vo  inoo  ON  invo        -^J-  CO  CO  10 

b  b  b  b  b  b  b  b  b  b  b  b 

invo  vo       d  cooo  ci  cooo  in 
CO      in  t^oo  vo  invo  vo  co  co  in 

b  b  b  b  b  b  b  b  b  b  b  b 

00  w  ^  HI  vo  COVO  in  CO  On  CO  O 
CO  CO  -^J-vo  vo  00  in  invo  •■^  co  co  in 

b  b  b  b  b  b  b  b  b  b  b  b  b 

^t~^0  Ovr}-cowoo  t^o  coco  in 
CO  cq       i^J-vo  c-^ini^in-^cjco 

b  b  b  b  b  b  b  b  b  b  b  b  b 

COVO  incodoo  O  rJ-inovQ 
CO  d  CO  mvo  vo  -i-      m  CO  r»  d 

b  b  b  b  b  b  b  b  b  b  b  b 

mov-^Ovt^coovd  cot^o  t-t 
_d  _w  _d  ^Tj-mco-^mcow  d 

b  b  b  b  b  b  b  b  b  b  b  b 

i-iddincOTj-rJ-ooNOoovo  00 
dwdcococodTj-i;j-coww  ci 

b  b  b  b  b  b  b  b  b  b  b  b  b 

vo  On  d       t^vo       in  ON  i-»  c4  d 
_>-i  O  1-1  p  d  1-1  _>-i  d  d  d  M  O  w 

b  b  b  b  b  b  b  b  b  b  b  b  b 

OnOOOwOvO'^Ovoooi-i  m 
O  p  p  O  iH  O  O  O  i-i  O  1-1  o  o 

b  b  b  b  b  b  b  b  b  b  b  b  b 

OwOmoOOdOOi-ivn  d 

o  p  o  o  o  o  o  o  o  o  w  o  o 
b  b  b  b  b  b  b  b  b  b  b  b 

d  d  t}-  t^vo  m  o  O  d  t->- 
dwMi-iOOOOwi-icJcl 

b  b  b  b  b  b  b  b  b  b  b  b  o 

COVO  t^ri-dvot^iHinONiniH  t*s. 
CO  >4-  m  d  d  w  d  co  co  ^  m 

b  b  b  b  b  b  b  b  b  b  b  b 

t^wt-^t^dOvni-iric^  inoo 
t^vo  invo  in  inoo  vo  t^oo 

b  b  b  b  b  b  b  b  b  b  b  b  

dvoclONcoovt-^mmco'+i-i  ^ 
P  00  p  ONOO  oovooocoononOn  Cv 

M  b  "w  b  b  b  b  b  w  b  b  b  b 


d 

b 
vo 


On 
vp 

b 


a 

o 


CO 
00 

I— I 
a 

-M  Oi 

CM  01 
rH  ^ 

^  o 

O  o 
«^  (uC^ 

CO  ir  I — I 
■S  pt<  ^ 

^ 

nl     <U  <» 


ax 


a  o 

5-1 

O  6C  03 
C3    C3  <U 


o 


GO 
CO 


o  £5 

«5  <u  fen 

a 

to 
c3 

O) 

;h 
o 


C3 


d 
o 

o 


Daily 
means. 

H  ^  tJ-  ON  to  m  0      0  t^M  M 
OOOOOOOOOOOOO 

r- 

M 

0 

Xt' 

CO 
<N 

0>-iOvooOc»i-iMvoroo 
^OOOOOOOHHOOO 
OOOOOOOOOOOOO 

to 
o 

0 

ja' 
(N 
(M 

O  O  vo  O  ri  O  0>vO  00  w  w 
OOOOOOiHiHiioOO 

OOOOOOOOOOOOO 

p 

LO 

o 
o 

ja' 
1—1 

<N 

OOOOOOM'i'-'iHOO 
OOOOOOOOOOOOO 
p 

oo 
o 
o 

m' 
O 
04 

O  >J3  ro  (q  0\  O  "J^  t1-oo  oo  oo  vo 

IHMI-IMO'-'I-IOH'-'OQ 

OOOOOOOOOOOOO 

p 

M 

0 

ja' 

C5 
^-4 

OS  O   m  c<        tJ-  t^vo  rl  -j^-  o\vo 

0»-<MMtHMMc)(4M00 

OOOOOOOOOOOOO 
p 

M 

o 

.£5* 

CO 

oo  On  O  m  to  -^vo  to  oo  M 
OOm»-i»hmmc^mi-)00 

OOOOOOOOOOOOO 

p 

CO 
M 

o 

ja' 

!>. 

Lnto  COM  o  «^oo  Ostoroco 
OOOwwwi-imoOOO 

OOOOOOOOOOOOO 

p 

oo 
O 
O 

ja' 

CD 

r<-i  CO  cj\oo  to  to  to        O  O  m 
OOOOOOOOOOOO 
OOOOOOOOOOOOO 

p 

■>*- 
O 
O 

ja' 

r-( 

cO'^c^OcoMrJOi-incot^ 
OOOOOOOOOOOO 

OOOOOOOOOOOOO 

p 

d 
O 
O 

J3* 
1—4 

■"J-rod  coc<  c<  O  dO  towto 
OOOOOOOOOOOO 

OOOOOOOOOOOOO 

p 

CO 

O 
O 

ja" 

CO 

0\  to  rl  t^pl  N  tJ-m  t~^co  •^oo 
OOOOOOOOOOOO 

OOOOOOOOOOOOO 

p 

to 
O 
0 

ja' 
<M 
1^ 

O  OS  tooo  T}-to  t^to  OS  r~.  t-^  o 
hoOOOOOOwOOm 
OOOOOOOOOOOOO 

oo 
O 
O 

ja* 
1— < 

to          ^          IH    M    too    OSOO    IH  t4 
MMMI-tMIHWMtqMMW 

OOOOOOOOOOOOO 

to 

o 

.a' 

o 

OsOsO  O  t--.^>-i  ro^rotot~^ 
'-iMNrlMi-ic»c^c<ir)>-iM 

OOOOOOOOOOOOO 

p 

O 
d 
o 

O  m  to  tooo  vo  d  oo  vo  oo  oo 
rJrlrJc4rlMc^cocorltH)H 

OOOOOOOOOOOOO 

p 

to 

d 
O 

ja" 

00 

CO  tooo  -^osc^  ^  t-*  ^  ^  ^os 
Mc)Ncoc)r^c<-i'^-<3-rorl'-i 

OOOOOOOOOOOOO 

p 

OS 
d 
0 

ja' 

!>. 

ro      i-t  Os  tooo  osvo  Q  -^oo  >-< 

OOOOOOOOOOOOO 
p 

CO 
CO 

O 

J3* 

to 

toto  1-1  tJ-oo  O  CO  m  d  CO  to  M 
N        cO'^coco.^totocorJ  ci 

OOOOOOOOOOOOO 

p 

to 

CO 

0 

lb 

'd-to  iH  to  N  1-1  t^so  CO  to  11 
rl  c)  co■^T}-cor^to^oco^^  c^ 

OOOOOOOOOOOOO 

p 

CO 

O 

O  t}-  OS  tooo  OS  T+-  O  d  oo  CO 
d       d  tJ-  CO  pi  ij-  toto  CO  d  d 

OOOOOOOOOOOOO 

p 

vo 
CO 

o 

CO 

CO  d  so  OS  1-1  tooo  d  O  d  vo  O 
d  d  d  CO  CO  d  CO  tJ-so  co  d  d 

OOOOOOOOOOOOO 

p 

d 

CO 

O 

(N 

r~.ososM  to      o  ^cot^d  OS 

MMl-tCOMMCO-^tOddl-l 

OOOOOOOOOOOOO 
O 

vo 
d 
O 

ja* 
1—1 

M  d  1-1  O  cooo  OS  CO  M  ^  O 
MMMdi-iOi-icOTj-d^Hi-i 

OOOOOOOOOOOOO 

O 

oo 

o 

x> 
O 

to  to  rhd  Tj-cotor--.oscot^Ti- 
OOOwOOi-icJdi-iOO 

OOOOOOOOOOOOO 

O 

M 

o 

Toronto  \ 
mean  time  J 

:      ::::•:«:  S 
fc-a  J  :  :  :  i-S  a|  a  0 

CO 

C 
a) 
a> 

I— I 
03 

u 

CO 


fl 
;-i 

fa 

«+-■ 
o 

GO 

<o 

0) 


CO 
CO 

1—4 

0) 

c 


CM 

CO 


3 
1-5 


o 

GO 
43 
-♦-> 

C! 

o 

S 


> 

CU 


43 
■+J 

o 

<u 
;3 

■4-> 

CU 
Ph 

a 

(U 

fl 


oo    0    1-1    lO  rJ-tO    d    CO  O    to  to  tJ- 
t1-O0    .l^^^pOO    p  tI-OsCOI-1 

oti-icoosd  cobtovi)  t--  *ti-vb 

f>l    f>l    r>9    «4*  l^v.n  Lr^  in    m     t    —a  — i 
V*      >4         i>b/  >W  >W     ^  I           C>  M 

00 

■<1- 

'J- 

JH   cooo  to   O  vo   to  1-1   Os  OsoO  1-1 

o  t~^to  d  lO  oo  to  M  d  d  oo  oo  bs 

M 

CO 

do 

O   0\V0   MOO   tJ-mvo  ^OWjf^ON 
Ovb  t}-  m  li^vo  t}-  b  "o  *H 

c*»  V*      1       ^ •               ^tJ  " 

d 

p 

00  ON  On^^  N       r»       u-ivo  rJ  vo 

o-^r)   ONrovorlooooCN  '^■^ 
d       '-ovo  v>o  CO 

d 

CO 

to 

On  Onoo  ^  O  oo  O  m  O  oo  vo  rj- 

o  CO  o           CO  b  ^  ^  r--  cJ 

#J    ■  ^-  i.n\.n  V  O  V n    i_n     t    rm  k1 

co 

CO 
CO 

vp  pN  ON  H        ^       N  _N  ^i^-vp  p 
ocoonioonOOO   COCOtJ-O  COlO 

to 

o  ooovovooovo  t^vo  vo  « 

o  CO  0   »J^vo         u-1  On  ON       'o\  CO  u-( 

fO     #^     ^>     ff^^N      I    I  v-t           I  /"s  1  ^-s           r^v-.  — % 

ci    vt           '      •           '  *  '  " '  c< 

oo 
OS 

O  r»  lovo  H  OnOnm  m  ^^-covn 
0  ro  o  >-nvo  »-nc1vooo  »h  ONCo»-n 

d    Cl    Ci    CO                            *-0  CO  CO  c) 

OS 
do 

d   *000    0               Cn  covo   u-j  H 
OCOO    »^t^»OClVOOO    >H  ONCOU-i 

#0      #0     f-f^      1 1    I        1        1  /— .   1  /-^ 

V*              \^  I    \4           1        )    w  >  *-*  1         *        J  V* 

IH 

OS 

vo   On  cJ  covo  covo        c^  On  rj- 

om   bvb   t^i^coK.oo   d  OvCO»J^ 
d  d  d  CO  ^J*      *-o  *-o      CO  co  d 

to 

CO 
OS 

Tj-COCOONCOt-l    CO^t^M  t^t-. 

o  CO  M  vi)              'rj-oo   On  d   O  co 
d  d  d  CO               v/^  LO      CO  d 

"co 
OS 
• 

OS 

r-.oo  ON  a-  oc  o\  o  co o  o 
o  CO  w  \o  oo  Od  Vj-oo  b  CO  b  Vj-Od 

d  d  d  CO           vovo  v/~i      CO  d 

i-i 

b 

vo  0  CO  M  0  t^oo  t>- oo  O  covo 
O  u-t  d   ts  OnOO  ^  On  b   CO  >-«  'rj-vis 

tN      CH     f  I            ^■'I                     "1            ^    '  (N 

vo 
'J 

vo   d   CO  cooo   i-i   t-~VO   d  vo   OS  On 
o        d    t--  OsOO  to    b    >H    rl-  w  ^tb 

V*     C*     \N      I '  '    ^4     *^  1                     *^  i            \ '  1  C^ 

d 
to 

M 

COI>sOOO   t^Ooo  tJ*0\COCOO 
ovo   *d  oo   ON  On        M         V  d 

d  d  d  CO      vovo  vo  *o      CO  d 

_d 

d 

CO  d  vo  t-^       ^  Cvvo  0  M  t-^  CO 
o  vo  cooo  b  b  oo  d  covo  CO 

vo 
OS 

d 

M 

cooo   lOOO  vOvO    M    coil  OnOn*^ 

oiocoonIh  ^  b  lo^ots-'coiot^ 

to 

o 

OOvo  vo  CO  H   CNd  ri-cot^coON 

O  vj^  'rj-  b    CO  vo  CO  OnOO  oo 

-J    n)    m  v4>  Lovo  vo  vO    LO  t4*  CO  r-4 

OS 

tp 
to 

covo   Osw  M  to        to  M  OO  Osd 

otb  vowvboovb  d  d  *>-i  votb  do 
d  d  CO  ^J*  vovo          vo       CO  d 

to 
to 

ft   Onvo   On  On  m  com  t^OO  t>-  Cn 
0  t^vb  CO      cnoo  Tt*  tJ-  CO  r^oo 
d  d  CO      vovo       t*^vo       CO  d 

M 

OS 

O  O  covo  CO  VN  t^vo  t^vo  O  oo 

OOO  00   ^00   boo  ^tJ-tJ-OnOnOn 

d  d  CO  ^*vo  vo        tsvo  ^J*  CO  d 

P 

b 

to  vo  On  O  to  cooo  oo  On  CO  On  vo 
OOO  oo  Vj-  ON  b  oo  ^            O   On  O 

OS 

CO 

b 

vo 

vo  w-iO  O  d  ostotoCsvoM 

OOO  do  lo'osb  "t^'^'J-'+O  0  O 
d  d  CO  ^*vo  vo        r**vo  to  to 

CO 

b 

to 

CO  d  Tj-toostot^CstocoO  rj- 

odo  do  rj-do  cst^coco^+o  O  b 
d  d  CO  t1-  toto       r^vo  to  ij-  co 

_Ot 

bs 

oo  tJ-oo  vo  0  t^OsO  On      to  On 

o           CO       Osvo  d  CO  CO  OS  OS  Os 
d  d  CO  T^  vovo  t-^  t^vo  ■4-  CO  d 

_d 

bs 

January... 
February  . 
March  .. 

July  ... 
August  ... 
September 
October... 
November 
December 

Means  ... 

CO 

O 


o  o 

g  in 
•2  ^  J3 

-*i  00  P 

o  -is 

S 

11  = 

s 


in 

o 


Oh 
O 

.S  « 


e3 

■^3 


c3 


§   §  ° 

o    <u  ■ 
oo  xi 

GO  ^  " 


n3 


> 
o 

a 

CD 


.t^  .2  o 

G  .2  a3 

%-*  Z2 

"  C 

a>  m 


a 

^       in      r^^o  c» 

oo 

'•1- 

r~- 

a* 

c^vo  ON'-'  rhci  o  lo^oONt^ro 
O   ^  t^NO  u-it-i   Onm  On^^On 
- 'm  m   ti  rj-  CO  V^       CO  Ih   w  O  O 

a* 

^  IN 

Cl   M  VO  oo   ON  ^ONO        c^  cooo 

Ti-VO    0\  ^  ^  ^  ONNO    M    C*-l  ON  Cl 

-  w       ij-  t-^  r-  c^Nb       il-  CO  b  " 

t-- 
■4- 

a^" 

vD  moo       d  O  NO  c4       ^  t^oo 
oo       cor^ONM  Tj-Ti-rj\p 
-  In  rovij  ON  On  b  oo  oo  vb  tJ-  M  M 

p 
Nb 

a^- 

oo  O  cooo  M  ^•d-mONt^N 
O       t^vo  M  lo  o  'tr  i-t  O  i^oo 

^           rOvb    b            *^     ONONf^VOtH  tH 
M     )H  M 

NO 
NO 

Nb 

a:** 

t^^O    W    ONONU-iONfH  cnO 

w  f^ino  mcot^M  moo  On 

-     mvb  b  w  1-1  "on  b      Vj-  M  M 

M     W    W  HI 

•o 

NO 

SIS' 

vr»  m  ij^oo  clOmONt^tHNi^ 
m  O  NO  ^1-1  moo  1-1       c^  oo 
-  "cq  Vf-vb  On  'h  "w  on  b  *t-^  "i-  i-i  " 

t-t     M  t-t 

NO 

>b 

a* 

rlOvoOc^-i-c^ooi-iONcirl 
On  H  m  t-^  ON  K-ioo  On  onoo  oo 
cl  mvb  0\  O  O  ON  on^  m  w  11 

IH  IH 

m 

Nb 

a^' 

^oo       m  m  o  O  'i'NO 
u-immi-idrimmOi-tr^O 

-  V<  Vj-vb  "o\  b  b   On  On  f~.      Vl  V) 

Nb 

a^' 

O       M  Onvo  O  ^  iv-too  On  m 
t-t  vo  M  u-i^o       u-i  lo      m  m  u-i 

—  m         oo  On  onoo  00  Nb  ^  V) 

to 

NO 

ai- 
^2 

.^hvo  m     oo  rl  ^3  O  oo  k-ioo 
m      t^oo  NO       O  t^oo 
^  m  ^  ij-ido  dooooooo  t^'^i-c^  cJ 

o 
r" 

Nb 

N  r»  i-i  NO  moo  M  M  M  00  NO  O 
t^iv-Nio.^t^c1  c^i-1  mi-1  o  1-1 
-  m  V^vb  oooooo  "t-^oo  t^vn'mm 

Nb 

m      onoo  1^  onno  d  Tj-  m  oo  00 

C»  NO  NO           ^NO    O    O    t^NO  NO 

^  ^  loNO  oo  00       t^oo       u-i  m  m 

NO 

a^' 

toONTj-r^'^mONt^ONO  Ti-rl 
NO  -^oo  wc»M.^6).si-clmu-> 

~  Vl-  in  r--  b>oo              K>b  Vt-  Vj- 

to 
<o 
Nb 

a^' 

NO       O  O  -si-  moo  1/1  m  w  r^\o 
trjNO  ^m^M  c^mmONTj-u^ 
~  Vh  '"-1      "o\     't^>b  "c^oo  vb  Vl-  Vj- 

NO 
NO 

NO 

a^' 

lOOO  oo    c<    N  NO  00    t^NO  NO  OnNO 

NO  w  C^OOO  *ooncI  O  ij^mtn 
-     u-ivb  ooNbNo  lot^ooNo 

Nb 

OS 

On 
to 

to 
to 

a^' 

Ol 

00 

as' 

m  m  m  moo  «jioo  On          i-i  m 
O  O  t^mw  ci  ctn'^OnOoo  O 
^  V}-  Vt*Nb  00  t-^Nb  io      t^O^  m 

oo  mONm^d-i^-tt^m  on  no 

MNO         On^N    O   t^_"+r^i-i  On 

m  mNO       C^NO  LONo       to  m 

On  tJ-no   .^no  no  no   -^OO        On  On 
mtomo  ONt^ONO  c^oo 
-  6»  m  io  c^No  to  Vt"  V^vb  ^  ri  ci 

o 

to 

a* 

On  -^no   rl"  on  rl              moo   IH  On 

ONOO  M  tON^toONONmO  t^m 
-iH       Vj-toto^m  vNNO  Vj-  V» 

NO 
M 

On  tooo  moo  N  Onno  o  On  o 
to  tooo  o  NO  On  m  HI  m  to  onoo 
-.M  M  c1  "5j*mri  cl  Vj*Vi-mHi  m 

o 

ON 

a^' 

•^t^tot^mr^Ht  .^f^t^to^ 
ci  tow  w  M  mM  rj-tot^tocl 
~HOi-<r)rli-ii-<r)MiHHH 

M 

NO 
HI 

a^ 

NO  On  ■>i-NO  m  O  O  O  ^oo  NO  NO 
_m  p  p            O  0  n4-oo  t1-  m  m 

-  b  b  b  b  b  b  b  b  b  b  b  b 

m 
m 

b 

000000'<l-00000 

ppppppppoooo 
-  b  b  b  b  b  b  b  b  b  b  b  b 

O 
O 

b 

a  ai" 

2  5^ 

o 

Tj-  On  On  rl  t^to  c-^      hi  on  m 
doooo  too  t^rj-ci  tomo  to 

~  b  b  b  M  M  *M  Ih  b  b  b  b  b 

O 
oo 

O 

Mean  time. . 

CO 

a 

ca 

ID 

o 

09 
03 


a 

05 


> 

•  i-H 

05 
I— I 

o 
a 

00 


00 


a 

o 

•N 

0!} 

o 

a 

> 

03 

-t-j 
o 

03 
0) 

a 

1=1 

ta 
<u 


Oncouic^vO   w   CTsO   roo  cor^ 

M  M  r<  CO  o^KQ  vQ        ^  T^-  rl 

d'sO  oncoi-i  o  r^t^cl  MOO 
o  oNvb  V»  ^     *C7\  'tJ-  Vi-  Vl  b  oo  ^ 


Mvooo  lor-scl  mclvo  m 
ooo  cno^0^cocoO  O^oo 

*H    M  m  Th  O-l*^  vo    U-i  CO  (.^ 


ctn  t^vo  oo 

f-N  w  oo   M  oo 


>->  v£)  C?\^  OO  r-.  ri- 
M  O  r»        d  O 


coo  ^  0\      t-^oo  cl  tH  oo  OO  oo  in 
M  M  M  m  t:^-  'nvQ  VQ        m  rl 


0^       ^  cn^o        On  lo  M  m  lo  co 

ooo  Vhoo  b'i)>i  b  Ost^t^V^in 
M   IH    >-4   CO        vn^jj   in        CO  c<  H 


ONvO  tH    ON  iJ^VO    "-O  t-N  CO  O  CO 

t^l>.roc)  HI   ONOOVO  HI  i-oo  p 

ooo  ^CXJ  cn  ^  ^oo  K-vi)  K-OO 
HI   M   M  rh 


I  to  *o  ^  CO  H 


O  OO         M   CO  CO  CO  co^O 

ONOO  '-n-<^t^co«nt^o*>0  O  On 

ooo  'rjroo  00       Vo  'i>.vb  Cd  t^oo  Vj- 

Hl  HI  HI  c1  ■^f^'^'^-^coc^  d 


'sj-vo  ^  r^oo  -"^-vo  CO  CO  lo 

O  Onoo  coiodvo  HI  ci  t^Moo 

o  On  '-^f-oo  oo  M  d      0^  vjD  t-^oo  Vi- 

M  Ht  HI       t:^  to  in  CO  d 


On  On^O  hi  t^ooo  r^-<d*»nt>.ij-i 

w  H(  d'O  '^•n-^u-j-^^oo  c40o 

o  ON  VT)  ONOO  w  HI  VO  vb  vi>  V^oo  Vj- 

M    M    iH    cl  Tj-U-)U-Nt0.^C0r<  d 


OnOncIOO  roovo  O  ^  O  c^vO 
d    COVp    ooo    ooo    dOO    O  -^ON 

oonioonCnhi  civo  r^vb  oo  oo  Vj- 
Hl        M        ^u-itQtn-^coM  d 


cooo  t-^  u-1  i>-oo  CO  O  to       lO  d 

CO         O  CO  lO  COVO    C»    HI  M 

ooN»no  ONd  Vi  r^r^V^oooo^n 

M    *H    M  Ti-lOU-lU-)T;J-COd  d 


00   in  O    t>-VO  vo  u-j        t-^  M 

CO  in  t-*  O  _M       o  HI  t--.  CO  rj-  d 

ooNino  b  VoVooooo  r^oooo  ^n 
»H  HI  d  coTj-uniQti-i-^co  d  d 


On       Hi        o  t~-<vo  d        c^  o  (.^ 
tJ*vo  cot~^o\Ooo  d  com-^j-co 
o  ON  in  M  o  CO  ^oo  Onoo  oo  oo  i/- 

Hl    M    c^    COTj-U-NU-NU^^cO  d  d 


i>>  ^      d  oo  -^vo  oo  onvo  d  oo 
vo  OnOn^coO  "nooooo  in^ 
oONinni  M  ininONboooooo  «n 
HI  HI  c<  CO       in  invo        co  d  d 


vo   On  "d-oo   ONOO        On  CO  M   m  oo 

P  r''  r*^    ^  ^oo     CO  ri* 

o  Ovvo  d  d  vD  vb  b  b  bv  Onoo  ^ 

HI    i-r    cl    CO  -rf-  ^nVQ  VO    tJ-  CO  d  d 

in  HI  ON  M  vo  invo  oo  d 
coonhi  o  d  HI  »ninin 


-ti-  d  O 
i>-  CO  d 

o  Onvo  CO  CO  b^oo  d  d 

HI  HI  c>i  CO  ^^f-  invD  vo 


O  Onoo  m 
^  CO  d  d 


M    C^OO    d    T}-t~^M    ovo  ONl>.d 

inoo  vo  oo  ONVO       HI  oo  vo  o 

°  ONVO   CO  ^  On  C\  CO  CO  HI    ONOO  vb 

M  M  ci  CO  T^  invQ  vo  in  CO  d  d 


cooo  '"^-"^hcoOoo  cod  O  coo 

J>-oo  1^  in  d  On  d  t^vo  cooo 

o  Onvo  Ti-vb  d  hi  in  tn  Vj  b  oo  in 

M   H  c^  CO  invo  vo  vo  in       d  d 


On  in  CO  CO  On  t~^vo  vo  vD  d  vo 
oo  f^^*^  d  O  d  ininoNONOv 

o  On  t^vb  C>D   rt*  ^  t-^OO   V  b  OO 

M  M  d  CO  invo  vQ       in  Tj-  ci  d 


d  w   CO  O 

OO  d  o  in  M 

O  ONOO  t-^  ON^n^'t^ONU-jtH  ON^ 

HI  HI        CO  invo  vo  vo  in 


CO  CO  cooo  vo  CO 
ON  OS  d  OO       d  M 


M  m  M  M  cj  vo  vo  Onoo  oo  »n  t^. 
P  ^       CO  Ti-vo       On  d 

OQOO   t^OO   '-rt-Tt-V-sOO   inM  ON^b 
d  HI  c^  CO  mvQ  vo  vo  m       f«i  c< 

O    t^OO    M    COHIVO    MVOOO  O 

^  r--  On  in  cooo  d  in  On  c^oo  ^ 
oOoovooo  ^VoV^oo  ind  b^ 
d  HI  d  CO  invo  vo  vo  in  ^  co  d 


M  oo  O  c-^  O  oo  CO  b  vo  o  d  m 
CO  p  oo  tJ-  On  p  vo  oo  d  rj- 
o  O  oo  vo  oo  CO  covb  oo  in  '-d-  b  vb 
d  M  H  CO  invo  vQ  vo  in       CO  d 


oo 


--   'd-  M  invo  CO  -d-  o  O  d 
d  tovo  qo  T^-o  inONr>sd 


CO 


o  o  00  in  fv,.  CO  covb  .  - 
d  HI  cj  CO  invo  vo  vo 


w  0\VO 
m  -^j-  d  d 


§  g  "a  J.  a> 


H,  ^        ^  ^  C«  O  J5  P 


:  «   :  S3  S 

^  3  OJ  -g  S  § 

>>  bO-"  2  >  O 

3       "  O  a) 


272  Appendix.  [Series  XXVI. 

Washington,  U.S.— Longitude  77°  2'  West.  Latitude  38°  54 
North.  Mean  declination  V  25'  West.  Mean  dip  71°  20' 
North. 

Mean  Diurnal  variation  of  the  Dechnation  in  minutes,  and 
temperature  in  Fahrenheit's  scale,  of  the  months  of  the 
years  1840,  1841,  1842,  which  are  specified. 

Increasing  numbers  denote  a  movement  of  the  south  or  upper 
end  towards  the  East. 


Mean  time  ... 

Noon, 
h  m 
0  12 

li  m 
2  12 

hra 
4  12 

h  m 
6  12 

h  m 
8  12 

h  m 
1012 

h  m 
12  12 

li  m 
14  12 

h  m 
16  12 

h  m 
18  12 

h  m! 
20  12 

h  m 
22  12 

Mean. 

Jan.  1841-42. 
Feb.  1841-42 . 
Mar.  1841-42. 
.\pr.  1841-42. 
May  1841-42 . 
June  1841-42. 
July  1840-41 . 
Aug.  1840-41. 
Sept.  1840-41. 
Oct.  1840-41 . 
Nov.  1840-41 
Dec.  1840-41 

4"  10 

3-  55 
6-34 
6-56 

772 
8-55 
8-42 
io'94 
876 
5-65 

4-  69 
'  3'93 

5'20 

5-28 

7-  51 

8-  33 

8-  57 
9*47 

9-  87 
IO-8I 

8-44 
5-83 

4"79 
4-90 

3*96 

4'22 
6-26 
6-42 
6-36 

8'oo 
8-07 

7'9S 
5"43 
4"35 
3'33 
3'39 

2-52 

2-89 

4-25 

4-41 

4"45 

5*33 

575 
6'oo 

4*45 
2-47 
i-6c 
1-92 

o'87 

1-  59 

2-  88 

3*22 

3-  82 

4-  91 
4-57 

4'o3 

2"62 
1-41 

o'5i 

O'lC 

0-68 

0-  94 

2-  31 

1-  97 

3'47 
4-24 

3-  5^ 
3'5S 
3"3i 
0-58 

1  074 
0-36 

1-  oi 
0-84 
2*50 
2*24 

3'^5 
4-05 
3"6o 
4-48 

2-  83 
i'4i 
1-14 
0*62 

I'62 
I"26 

3'co 

i'35 

3-  05 

4-  32 

3-  40 

4-  64 
2-86 
r8o 

■  i"4i 
i'S3 

1-  66 
o-8i 
171 
073 

2-  63 

3"44 
2-99 
4-04 
2-44 
1-51 
0-82 
0-93 

171 
0-82 

i'i3 
0-46 

o"33 
0*63 

0-  98 

1-  35 
0*87 

i'35 
071 

2"0C 

o'9i 
o*6o 

O'OO 

o"oo 
o'oo 

O'OO 
0"00 
O'OO 
O'OO 
O'OO 
0  00 
I'02 

0*29 

o'35 
i'76 

2'l8 

4-25 

4-53 
3*62 

589 

4'22 

175 
1-83 
0-87 

2*04 
i"76 
3-30 

3-  15 
3'99 

479 

4-  56 

5'3o 
3-85 

^"34 

'  179 
179 

Temperature. 


Mean  time  ... 

Noon, 
h  m 
0  12 

h  m 
2  12 

h  m 
4  12 

h  m 
612 

h  m 
8  12 

h  m 
10  12 

h  m 
12  12 

h  m 
14  12 

h  m 
16  12 

h  m 
18  12 

h  m 
20  12 

h  m 
2212 

Jan.  1841-42 . 
Feb. 1841-42 . 
Mar.  1841-42. 
Apr.  1841-42. 
May  1841-42. 
June 1841-42. 

Aug.  1840-41. 
Sept.  1841  ... 

Oct.  1841  

Nov.  1841  ... 
Dec.  1841  ... 

38-28 
40'03 

5i'39 
57-68 
66-37 
79'32 
81-13 
78-70 
74-66 

55'3o 
48-00 
'39-20 

40-83 
42-51 

53'6i 
59-81 
68-48 
81-85 

81-53 
8073 
76-50 
57-00 
49-20 
141-30 

0 

40-18 
42-28 
53-28 
60-20 
68-69 

82-75 
84-60 

80-09 
76-30 
56-20 
48-50 
'40-60 

36-68 
38-22 
49-96 
57-21 

65-93 
76-89 

81-33 

75'93 
72*30 

52-94 

47'3° 

37'95 

35*47 

35-  38 
46'20 
52-18 
59-83 
72-29 

74"93 
71-48 

68-59 
48-40 
44-20 

36-  26 

34-24 

33-  86 

44-37 
49-12 
56-70 
68-70 
71-56 
68-00 
64-90 
46-60 
43*20 

34-  7C 

0 

32-37 

32-  58 
42-48 

47-91 

55-19 
66-83 

68-78 

66-82 

62*70 

44-90 

41*80 

33-  5C 

0 

32*10 
31*22 
41*26 
46-91 

53-34 
66-04 
68-09 
65-12 
61*90 
43*70 
40*70 
33*16 

0 

31*71 

30*51 

40*06 

46' 12 

52*42 

65*07 

66*78 

64*17 

61*00 

42-30 

139-4° 
32*20 

30-53 
30*18 

39-87 
46*49 

55-50 
68*26 

70*64 

65*69 

61*29 

41*70 

38*80 

'31*60 

31-63 
3i"44 
42-28 

49-93 
59-72 

73-63 

75-19 
65*73 

65-73 
45*00 
39*50 
31*69 

0 

36*96 
36-72 
48-06 
54-02 
63*23 

77*37 
78*38 
76-09 
71-02 
51*61 
44*io 
136*00 

a 
a 

u 
P 


Mean  time. 

13  days  obs.  in 
Oct.  1843. 

25  days  obs.  in 
Nov.  1843. 

25  days  obs.  in 
Dec.  1843. 

25  days  obs.  in 
Jan.  1844. 

25  days  obs.  in 
Feb.  1844. 

5  minutes 
to  mid- 
night. 

11  55 

0\             ^         00  q 
.^J.     vo  p 

P  lO 

© 

o    o  r~" 

^00        CO       Vj-           vo  vo 

o     00      ON  o\ 

CO      O                     0>  CTs 

~  CO  CO 

t--^         CO        1^  OO 
.rl-         CO  ^^ 

^  CO              '-d-          in  i/^ 

a 

u-j  OO 

t->.    cjv   in  r* 

~  Vo      V}-      CO          "u-i  '"-> 

a  '2 

in 
^  to 

OO         C)        OO  c< 

OO         in        M  ON 

^  M     Vi-    V^       Vi-  Vi- 

a  in 
'-'  in 

in 

OO                      f-l  CO 

OO       CO     OO          ^  y~i 
^  rl        CO       CO  CO 

a 

^  in 

ON  CO 

t}-    ON  »p 

~  b        'c<        Vl             C»  CO 

a  in 
H  in 

CO 

OO        CO  t-^ 
ON                    CO  vo 
^  b          V«           H                 M  CO 

in 

CO      CO          in  OO 

O          ON  OO 

~  b      M      b         «  M 

a  in 
>-•  in 

.a  r-. 

ON              o           o  o 
d       ^     p          p  p 

^  b     w     b   -     b  b 

a  "2 
w  in 

o 

0      NO       CO          On  in 
O       O       O           CO  in 

b     i-i     b        b  M 

5  minutes 
to  noon, 
h  m 
23  55 

O        O        1^           O  CO 

O          lO              M  ON 

d       O       O           c^  d 

a  "2 

w  in 

CT\       O                       ON  d 
d       i-«       On          On  OO 

^  Vl       M       >->           <4-  V) 

a  '-'^ 

"  in 

CO      tJ-      CO  in 
O                CO          ON  vo 
^         vb       in  OO 

a  '2 

*-*  in 

C»        CO      OO            vo  vo 
t-~     vo       m  On 

-O               vb           bv  H 

ag 

O       O       CO          c^  O 

ON       OO          C-^              O  M 

^  On    OO     via         b  V» 

a  in 
in 

m      o      OO           r-.  vo 
CO      tJ-                  On  p 

^  CO      On      on     ■    'on  "i- 

►H  M 

a  "2 

*-*  in 
(—1 

in      o       w  in 
•n     OO      vo           O  OO 
••00      b                  b  Vj- 

H  MM 

a  in 
^S 

cl       in      CO          On  O 
CO      CO      rl           cl  00 
» *M       b       On         vb  Vj- 

Cl            W  MM 

as 
^2 

vn              in  in 
On      o      vo           in  in 

~oo       ON     in          ■«  b 

as 

CO              t-~  vo 
f<              vn  On 
>vo     vo      in        lb  00 

a  in 
in 

ov          ,  vo          OO  to 
M       w           tI-  On 
^  K      in     vb          00  V^ 

a  '2 

in 

CO      CO      T^  On 
H               p          vo  d 
•*  »-<       CO      CO  in 

Mean  -i 
time.  / 

CO  :      :      :         ;  • 

2  o    o    S    2  S  -g 

(U 


03 

'v3 


00 


O 


in 

o 


3  ^ 

iJ  ,Jm  '-I 

.  o  s:i^ 

a  ^ 

CO.S  g 

O       ^  XI 

Id  :S 
Qj  g 

n 


g  oj  a 

I  o  a 

§  § 

S  ^  G 

.1  ^  1 


O 


.a 

V 

u 
o 


Mean  time. 

20  days  obs.  in 
Apr.  1844. 

18  days  obs.  in 
May  1844. 

as 

vn 

in  vo 
• 

as 
^2 

vo  On 

OO  (4 

V)  d 

as 

,Ct  CTJ 

vo  >H 

_c) 

M  CO 

as 

■ra  00 

d  C< 
vo 

^  Vi-  lb 

a 

^  O 

O  ON 

as 

-a  CO 

O  ON 
CO  H 

^  b  b 

a  in 
^  1—1 

■d  in 

CO  o 

•4-  O 
-  b  b 

a  in  1      CO  o 

"  i-l           d  OO 

Jd     1  ~  M  b 

as 

.£3  CO 

»n 

CO 

^  *M  b 

as 

o  o 
o 

^  b  b 

as 

vo  in 

^  Vl  CO 

15  minutes 
past  noon. 

0  15 

^  in  Vl- 

as 

CO 

On 

d  -tt- 

^OO  ON 

as 

-d 

r-^  M 
in 

xoo  in 

as 

On 

d  _c» 
■»  in  b 
cl  c» 

as 

^  O 

H  00 

^  b  ON 
CO  cl 

as 

O  On 
vo  vo 

>•  c» 

CO  CO 

as 

vo  cl 
cl  Pi 
••vb  OO 

CO  N 

a 

O  CO 

OO  r-. 

^vb  CO 
CO  cl 

as 

O  ON 
ON  W 

d  M 

a 

-1  in 

l-H 

vo  CO 
M  vo 

^  in  In 
d  H 

as 

m  M 
f- 

^  M 
M  M 

as 
^S 

CO 

P 

^>b 

15  minutes 
past  mid- 
night, 
h  m 
12  15 

d  vo 
OO  in 

^  in  M 

Meani 
time.  J 

J  ■• 

2  a.  ^ 

VOL.  III. 


274 


TWENTY-SEVENTH  SERIES  ^ 

§  S3.  On  Atmospheric  Magnetism — continued. 
Received  November  19, — Read  November  28,  1850. 

1"  ii.  Experimental  inquiry  into  the  laws  of  atmospheric  magnetic 
action,  and  their  application  to  particular  cases. 

2969.  Believing  that  experiment  may  do  much  for  the  deve- 
lopment of  the  general  principles  of  atmospheric  magnetism,  and 
produce  rapidly  a  body  of  facts  on  which  philosophers  may 
proceed  hereafter  to  raise  a  superstructure,  I  endeavoured  to 
find  some  means  of  representing  practically  the  action  of  the 
atmosphere,  when  heated  by  the  sun,  upon  the  terrestrial  mag- 
netic curves.  The  object  was  to  obtain  some  central  arrange- 
ment of  force  which  should  deflect  these  curves  or  hnes  as  they 
are  deflected  in  a  diamagnetic  conductor  or  globe  of  hot  air 
(2877-)3  3^nd  then  apply  the  results  obtained  by  such  an  arrange- 
ment as  a  partial  test  to  the  various  cases  supplied  by  the  mag- 
netic observatories  scattered  over  the  earth.  At  first  I  endea- 
voured, for  the  sake  of  convenience,  to  attain  this  desired  end 
by  means  of  a  horseshoe  magnet,  employing  the  hnes  which 
passed  from  pole  to  pole  to  disturb  and  re-arrange  the  earth's 
force  ;  but  the  comparative  weakness  of  the  terrestrial  force  near 
the  magnet,  and  the  great  prominence  of  the  poles  of  the  latter, 
gave  rise  to  many  inconveniences,  which  soon  caused  me  to 
reject  that  method  and  have  recourse  to  a  ring-helix  and  voltaic 
apparatus.  Considering  the  new  use  to  which  this  helix  is  to 
be  applied,  the  interest  of  the  results,  and  the  instruction  that 
may  be  drawn  from  them,  I  shall  be  excused  for  being  somewhat 
elementary  in  the  description  of  its  character  and  action. 

2970.  The  helix  consisted  of  about  12  feet  of  covered  copper 
wire  formed  into  a  ring  having  about  twenty-five  convolutions, 
and  being  1^  inch  in  external  diameter.  The  continuations  of 
the  wire  were  twisted  together  so  as  to  neutralize  any  magnetic 

'  Philosophical  Transactions,  1851,  p.  85. 


Nov.  1850.]    Experimental  deflection  of  lines  of  force.  2/5 


effect  which  they  could  produce,  and  were  long  enough  to  reach 
to  a  voltaic  arrangement,  and  yet  allow  free  motion  of  the  helix. 
The  requisite  amount  of  magnetic  power  in  the  helix  may  be 
judged  of  by  the  following  considerations : — Suppose  a  dechna- 
tion  needle  freely  suspended;  and  then  the  helix  placed  at  a 
distance  in  the  prolongation  of  the  needle  with  its  axis  in  a  line 
with  the  latter,  and  with  that  side  towards  the  needle  which  will 
at  small  distances  cause  repulsion.  The  needle  will  point,  in  the 
magnetic  meridian,  with  a  certain  amount  of  force ;  but  as  the 
helix  is  brought  near  it  will  point  with  less  force,  and  within  a 
certain  distance  will  no  longer  point  in  the  magnetic  meridian, 
but  either  on  one  or  the  other  side  of  it.  There  is  a  given 
distance  within  which  the  needle,  when  in  the  magnetic  meridian, 
is  in  a  position  of  unstable  equilibrium,  but  beyond  which  it  has 
a  position  of  stable  equilibrium,  the  distance  varying  with  the 
strength  of  the  exciting  electric  current.  The  power  of  the  helix 
should  be  such,  that  when  end  on  to  the  needle  the  latter  has  a 
position  of  stable  equilibrium  in  the  meridian.  One  pair  of 
plates  is  quite  sufficient  to  make  the  helix  as  magnetic  as  is 
needful  for  distances  varying  from  4  to  24  inches.  When  a 
needle  is  properly  arranged  with  either  a  magnet  or  a  helix  to 
the  north  or  south  of  it  as  above  described,  if  the  magnet  or 
helix  be  moved  west  the  near  end  of  the  needle  will  move  east, 
and  contrariwise. 

2971.  As  is  well  known,  such  a  helix  has  a  system  of  magnetic 
lines,  which,  passing  through  its  axis,  then  opens  out  and  turning 
round  on  the  outside  re-enters  again  at  the  axis,  the  circles  of 
magnetic  force  being  everywhere  perpendicular  to  the  electric 
current  traversing  the  convolutions  of  the  helix ;  and  now  I  had, 
at  a  moment's  notice,  a  source  of  lines  of  magnetic  power  exactly 
of  the  kind  required  to  produce,  in  association  with  those  of  the 
earth,  *a  disposition  of  the  forces  coinciding  either  with  those  of 
paramagnetic  or  diamagnetic  polarization  (2865.  2877')* 

2972.  For  let  fig.  17  represent  a  section  parallel  to  ^'S-  17. 
the  axis  of  the  ring-helix,  then  the  two  circles  may 
represent  the  disposition  of  the  magnetic  force  in 
that  section,  and  the  arrow-heads  may  serve  to  indi- 
cate that  magnetic  direction  which  belongs  to  lines  of 
force  issuing  out  of  the  north  end  of  a  magnet.  If  _ 
such  a  system  be  suddenly  produced  in  the  midst  of  the  earth's 

T  2 


276 


Atmospheric  magnetism.       [Series  XXVI. 


Fig.  18. 


lines,  it  acts  upon  them  according  to  the  position  of  the  hehx  in 
relation  to  the  direction  of  the  earth's  power.  Choosing  the  two 
positions  in  which  the  axis  of  the  helix  is  parallel  to  the  natural 
direction  of  the  power,  as  shown  by  a  free  needle,  at  the  place 
of  observation,  then  two  contrary  effects  are  produced,  which,  as 
regards  the  lines  exterior  to  the  helix  system,  correspond  to  the 
polarity  of  paramagnetic  and  diamagnetic  conductors.  If,  for 
instance,  the  helix  is  so  placed  that  the  polarity  of  its  magnetic 
lines,  exterior  to  and  in  the  plane  of  the  ring,  accords  with  that 
of  the  earth's  force,  as  in  fig  18,  then 
the  earth's  lines  are  deflected  as  re- 
presented, and  a  magnetic  needle 
placed  at  a,  w'hich  had  taken  up  its 
position  by  the  earth's  influence,  will 
not  tend  to  alter  its  position  as  the 
helix  approaches  it,  though  it  will  be 
acted  on  with  more  power.  In  other 
parts  of  the  line,  b  a  c,\t  will  alter  its  position,  standing  as  a 
tangent  to  the  curvature,  and  therefore  will  be  deflected  some- 
times one  way  and  sometimes  another,  as  it  is  carried  along  the 
line  (or  through  the  neighbouring  lines),  in  place  of  remaining 
parallel  to  itself,  as  it  would  do  if  the  electro-magnetic  helix  were 
away. 

2973.  On  the  other  hand,  if  the  helix  were  turned  round  into 
the  second  position  (2972.),  then  the  effect  upon  the  direction  of 
the  neighbouring  lines  of  force  would  be 

as  in  fig.  19.  Needles  placed  at  d  and  e 
would  again  be  deflected  from  the  natu- 
ral position  given  to  them  by  the  earth, 
but  they  would  be  deflected  in  a  con- 
trary direction  to  that  which  would  be 
taken  if  they  were  in  corresponding  situ- 
ations under  the  former  arrangement.  This  figure  and  state  of 
things  represents  the  paramagnetic  disposition  of  the  forces,  as 
the  former  did  the  diamagnetic  condition. 

2974.  It  is  not  pretended  that  the  whole  of  these  arrangements 
of  forces  are  like  those  of  the  cases  of  paramagnetic  and  diamag- 
netic conductors.  Independent  systems  are  here  introduced  into 
the  midst  of  the  earth's  magnetic  power,  and  the  central  part  of 
each  arrangement  must  therefore  be  excepted ;  there  are  also 


Nov.  1850.]    Experimental  deflection  of  lines  of  force.  277 

attractions  inwards  and  repulsions  outwards,  when  the  needle  is 
at  a  and  f,  which  do  not  take  place  in  the  cases  of  mere  magnetic 
conduction.  But  external  to  these  helix  systems,  the  arrange- 
ment imposed  upon  the  lines  of  force  fi'om  the  earth  is  in  ac- 
cordance with  that  produced  by  diamagnetic  and  paramagnetic 
conductors,  and  at  distances  from  2  inches  to  2  or  3  feet ;  the 
lines  of  force  thus  altered,  and  those  contorted  by  the  sun  and 
atmosphere  in  the  great  field  of  nature,  are  comparable  in  their 
direction,  and  may  be  considered  as  representing  each  other. 

2975.  In  order  to  obtain  a  simple  result  of  the  action  of  such 
a  centre  of  force  on  the  magnetic  lines  of  the  earth,  I  adjusted 
a  rod  in  the  direction  of  the  dipping-needle,  and  also  a  plane  at 
the  foot  of  it  parallel  to  the  magnetic  equator  at  London.  Then 
suspending  a  small  magnet,  half  an  inch  long,  from  cocoon-silk, 
so  that  when  hanging  it  should  be  parallel  to  the  magnetic 
equator,  it  was  adjusted  so  as  to  be  near  to  the  plane  at  the  foot 
of  the  rod  representing  dip.  The  ring-helix  (2970.)  was  then 
associated  with  the  voltaic  pair,  so  that  contact  could  be  com- 
pleted at  any  moment,  and  being  always  retained  parallel  to 
itself  and  to  the  plane  of  the  magnetic  equator,  could  be  brought 
into  the  vicinity  of  the  needle  on  all  sides,  above  or  below,  and 
its  action  upon  it  observed.  As  the  object  was  to  represent  the 
sun's  action,  the  current  was  so  sent  through  the  helix  that  its 
upper  face  would  repel  the  north  end  of  a  magnetic  needle  ;  for 
then  a  magnet,  outside  of  and  in  the  plane  of  the  ring,  would 
not  tend  to  have  its  position  changed,  and  the  disposition  of  the 
forces  of  the  earth  under  the  influence  of  the  helix  was  as  in 
fig.  18,  or  like  that  of  a  diamagnetic  conductor. 

2976.  In  making  observations  of  this  kind,  and  especially  if 
the  ring-helix  is  purposely  retained  at  a  considerable  distance 
from  the  needle,  it  is  better  not  to  connect  the  helix  permanently 
with  the  battery  and  then  carry  it  tow^ards  and  by  the  needle, 
but  rather  to  choose  the  place  where  the  heHx  action  is  to  be 
observed,  and  when  the  helix  is  there  to  make  contact  with  the 
battery ;  the  motion  and  direction  of  the  needle  is  then  easily 
observed;  or  if  it  still,  through  reason  of  distance,  be  feeble, 
making  and  breaking  contact  a  few  times  isochronously  with  the 
vibrations  of  the  needle  soon  raises  the  eflfect  to  any  degree 
required. 

2977.  There  are  certain  positions  in  respect  of  the  needle  as 


278  Atmospheric  magnetism.       [Series  XXVI. 

a  centre  which  must  be  clearly  comprehended.    The  magnetic 
axis  is  a  line  through  the  centre  of  the  free  regular  needle  parallel 
to  the  direction  of  the  earth's  lines  of  force,  whatever  that  may 
be,  at  the  place  where  the  expenments  may  be  made.  The 
magnetic  equator  plane  is  a  plane  passing  through  the  centre 
of  the  needle  perpendicular  to  the  magnetic  axis.    The  plane 
of  the  magnetic  meridian  is  that  plane  which  coincides  M'ith  the 
magnetic  axis,  and  also  with  the  direction  in  which  the  declina- 
tion needle  points.  This  position  always  occurs  with  the  magnets 
that  are  employed  for  observation,  being  a  consequence  of  the 
method  in  which  they  are  supported ;  it  would  not  be  taken  by 
a  needle  placed  at  right  angles  on  its  mechanical  axis,  the  latter 
being  in  the  magnetic  axis. 

2978.  When  the  ring-helix,  situated  as  before  explained 
(2975.),  was  anywhere  in  the  plane  of  the  magnetic  meridian, 
it  exerted  no  action  on  the  declination  needle  tending  to  change 
its  position.  When  the  helix  was  anywhere  in  the  plane  of  the 
magnetic  equator,  it  exerted  no  action  on  the  needle  to  make  it 
change  its  direction.  These  are  the  only  places  iu  which  the 
hehx  does  not  affect  the  position  of  the  needle. 

2979.  These  two  planes  of  no  variation  divide  the  space 
around  the  magnet  into  four  quadrants,  and  the  helix  being  in 
any  one  of  these,  affects  the  needle,  altering  its  declination. 
The  deflection  of  the  line  of  force  for  two  neighbouring  qua- 
drants is  in  the  contrary  direction,  so  that  as  the  helix  passes 
from  the  neutral  line  into  one  or  the  other  quadrant,  the  declina- 
tion of  the  needle  changes. 

2980.  If  the  helix  be  above  or  below  the  magnetic  equator  and 
be  carried  round  the  magnetic  axis  traveUing  along  a  line  of 
latitude,  then  the  needle  makes  07ie  large  oscillation  to  the  right, 
and  another  to  the  left  during  the  circuit.    Supposing  that  the 
experiment  commences  with  the  helix  above  the  equator,  and  in 
the  plane  of  the  magnetic  meridian  north  of  the  needle,  if  it  then 
proceeds  by  west  to  south  and  on  by  east  to  its  original  position 
the  north  end  of  the  needle  will  first  go  westward;  will  then 
stop  and  return  eastward,  passing  the  mean  position,  and  will 
finally  return  westward  and  settle  in  its  first  or  original  direction. 
All  the  time  the  helix  is  to  magnetic  east  of  the  needle  it  will 
cause  the  same  deflection,  and  also  as  long  as  it  is  in  the  west; 
the  deflection  will  be  more  or  less,  but  not  change  in  direction 


Nov.  1850.]    Experimental  deflection  of  lines  of  force.  279 

as  regards  the  neutral  place.  The  position  of  the  helix  north  or 
south  of  the  needle  is  of  no  consequence  as  to  the  direction  of 
the  dechnation,  provided  it  remain  on  the  same  side  of  the  mag- 
netic meridian,  though  it  is  to  the  amount.  If  the  helix  be 
below  the  magnetic  equator  the  direction  of  the  declination  is 
reversed,  but  then  again  it  does  not  change  whilst  the  helix  re- 
mains east  or  west  of  the  needle  and  its  plane  of  mean  declination. 

2981.  If  we  carry  the  helix  round  the  needle  in  a  plane  per- 
pendicular to  the  planes  of  the  magnetic  equator  and  meridian, 
so  as  to  traverse  in  succession  the  four  quadrants,  then  the 
needle  makes  two  to  and  fro  vibrations  (instead  of  one)  during 
the  circuit.  Thus,  beginning  with  the  helix  in  the  neutral 
position  over  the  needle  and  going  round  by  west  and  below, 
and  then  upwards  on  the  east  side  to  its  first  position,  the  north 
end  of  the  needle  will  first  pass  westward,  then  eastward,  then 
westward,  after  that  eastward,  and  finally  westward  to  its  original 
or  neutral  position. 

2982.  As  the  helix  is  carried  from  the  neutral  planes  (2978.) 
into  any  of  the  quadrants,  the  povs'er  of  affecting  the  declination 
of  the  needle  is  first  developed,  and  then  increases  every  way, 
from  the  edges  of  the  quadrant  until  it  attains  its  maximum 
force  at  the  middle.  Hence  the  maximum  deflection  east  or 
west  is  when  the  helix  is  in  the  middle  of  each  quadrant.  There- 
fore, when  the  helix  is  carried  from  the  middle  of  one  quadrant 
to  the  middle  of  the  next,  only  one  motion  in  the  needle  appears ; 
as  for  instance,  an  increasing  westerly  declination,  though  the 
direction  of  the  dechnation  in  relation  to  the  mean  position  has 
been  reversed  in  that  time,  and  there  was  a  moment  when  the 
needle  had  no  extra  declination,  but  was  in  that  mean  position. 
So  also  as  the  helix  moves  over  one  quadrant  from  one  neutral 
plane  to  another,  though  the  declination  of  the  needle  produced 
by  it  has  not  changed  in  direction,  but  has  been,  for  instance, 
all  the  time  west,  still  the  needle  will  have  exhibited  two  motions 
going  first  west  during  the  increase  of  the  power,  and  then  east 
whilst  it  is  diminishing ;  and  hence  it  is  that  though  there  are 
four  departures  of  the  needle  from  and  return  to  the  neutral  or 
mean  position,  whilst  the  helix  circumscribes  it  in  an  east  and 
west  vertical  plane  (2981.),  there  are  only  two  complete  journeys 
of  the  needle. 

298.3.  The  amount  of  the  deflection  diminishes  as  the  distance 
of  the  helix  from  the  needle  increases  ;  and  the  contrary. 


280  Atmospheric  magnetism.       [Series  XXVI. 

2984.  Two  other  needles  were  slung  (2975.)  very  obhque  to 
the  magnetic  axis,  one  with  its  north  end  upwards  and  the  other 
Avith  its  north  end  downwards,  and  these  were  submitted  to  the 
action  of  the  helix  as  the  former  had  been  (2978.).    They  were 
affected  exactly  in  the  same  manner,  showing  no  difference ;  i.e. 
a  given  end  always  moved  the  same  way  for  the  same  change  in 
position  of  the  helix.    If  the  helix  was  very  near,  then  one  pole 
was  a  little  more  influenced  than  the  other  in  certain  positions ; 
but  its  removal  further  off  took  away  that  difference  (which  is 
easily  accounted  for  (2970.))  and  produced  pure  results.  The 
place  of  the  helix  above  or  below  the  prolongation  of  the  hne  of 
the  needle  made  no  difference,  provided  it  was  in  the  same  place 
as  regarded  the  magnetic  equator  of  the  earth's  lines  of  force 
passing  through  the  needle. 

2985.  For  the  purpose  of  establishing  the  nature  of  the  action 
which  such  a  helix,  always  in  the  given  or  diamagnetic  position 
(2975.),  would  exert  upon  the  inclination,  a  small  dipping-needle 
was  submitted  to  its  action  and  the  following  results  obtained. 
The  needle -could  move  in  the  plane  passing  through  the  mag- 
netic meridian  of  London. 

2986.  There  was  no  deflection  of  the  needle  when  the  hehx 
was  in  the  plane  of  the  magnetic  equator,  or  in  a  plane  perpen- 
dicular to  that  containing  the  mechanical  axis  of  the  needle.  In 
every  other  position  it  affected  it ;  so  that  these  two  planes  divided 
the  sphere  of  action  into  four  segments,  as  before. 

9987  As  the  helix  passes  from  one  quadrant  to  another,  the 
direction  in  which  the  needle  is  deflected  changes  as  before 
(2982.).    If  the  helix  is  in  the  upper  north  segment  or  the  lower 
south  segment,  the  upper  or  south  end  of  the  needle  is  deflected 
towards  the  south;  if  the  helix  be  in  the  upper  south  or  lower 
north  segments,  the  upper  or  south  end  of  the  needle  is  deflected 
towards  the  north.    If  the  helix  be  carried  round  the  needle  m 
the  direction  of  the  plane  of  motion,  which  in  this  case  is  that  of 
the  magnetic  meridian,  the  end  of  the  needle  starting  from  a 
mean  or  unaffected  position  will  move  first  one  way  as  for 
instance,  north  and  then  south;  north  again  and  south  again, 
and  finally  north  to  regain  its  place  of  rest:  so  that  there  are 
two  extreme  deflections  of  the  end  in  each  direction,  as  before, 
in  the  case  of  the  declination  magnet  (2982.).  ,  , 

2988.  In  other  words,  when  the  helix  was  anywhere  below  the 
magnetic  equator,  the  lower  or  north  end  of  the  needle  tended 


Nov.  1850.*] 


Expei'imental  illustrations. 


281 


to  point  outwards  from  it  or  outside  of  it,  being  as  it  were  repelled 
by  the  axis  of  the  hehx,  but  drawn  by  the  outer  curved  lines  of 
force,  fig.  20  (2992.).  Or  if  the  helix  were  above  the  equator, 
then  the  upper  or  south  end  of  the  needle  went  outwards  from 
the  helix,  moving  exactly  in  the  same  direction  in  relation  to  the 
helix  as  the  lower  pole  did  before. 

2989.  The  support  of  the  needle  was  turned  round  90°,  which 
therefore  removed  the  plane  in  which  the  needle  could  move  90° 
from  the  magnetic  meridian.  This  carried  the  plane  of  no  action 
on  the  needle  90°  round,  so  that  it  now  coincided  with  the  mag- 
netic meridian ;  and  the  plane,  which,  standing  east  and  west, 
was  before  neutral,  was  no  longer  a  plane  of  indifference,  but  in 
fact  passed  at  the  middle  of  the  segments  through  the  places  of 
strongest  action. 

2990.  Here,  with  inclination,  as  before  with  declination,  it  is 
not  the  direction  in  which  the  needle  stands  that  determines 
what  action  the  helix  may  have  upon  it ;  for  it  may  be  loaded 
or  otherwise  restrained,  as  all  horizontal  needles  are ;  but  it  is 
the  direction  of  the  lines  of  force  at  the  needle  which,  with  the 
helix,  governs  all.  The  helix  may  be  above  or  below  the  pro- 
longation of  the  needle  indifferently ;  for  if  it  still  continues  on 
the  same  side  of  the  line  of  force,  under  the  influence  of  which 
the  needle  acts,  then  the  end  of  the  needle  moves  in  the  same 
direction,  though  it  may  travel  towards  the  helix  in  one  instance 
and  from  it  in  another. 

2991.  I  suspended  a  needle  so  that  it  was  free  to  move  in 
every  direction,  and  now  I  obtained  the  simple  natural  effect  of 
the  helix,  or  a  diamagnetic  globe  (2877>)  on  a  given  line  of  force, 
and  it  is  well  to  have  it  in  mind.  For,  though  we  are  obliged 
for  the  sake  of  practical  observation  to  divide  the  position  into 
two  parts,  declination  and  inclination,  yet  the  results  in  each 
case  are  much  better  compared  and  remembered  when  the  simple 
law  of  change  in  the  whole  line  of  force  is  ready  in  the  mind  for 
reference.  The  equatorial  plane  and  the  magnetic  axis  are  now 
the  only  parts  in  which  the  helix  can  be  without  affecting  the 
position  of  the  needle  ;  the  first  gives  places  (for  the  helix)  with 
a  stable  position  for  the  needle,  and  the  second  such  as  have 
either  stable  or  unstable  positions,  according  to  the  helix  distance. 

2992.  If  the  helix  be  out  of  the  plane  and  axis,  then  the  end 
of  the  needle  nearest  to  it  leans  from  it  as  if  repelled.    If  the 


282 


Atmospheric  magnetism.       [Series  XXVI, 


Fig.  20. 


7 


1 


helix  be  carried  round  in  a  circle  of  latitude,  the  end  of  the 
needle  moves  round  before  it  just  like  the  upper  end  of  the 
needles  at  Hobarton  and  Toronto,  in  respect  of  the  sun,  during 
the  midday  hours.  Instead  of  moving  the  helix  round  the 
needle,  we  may  carry  the  needle  into  different  positions  as  re- 
gards the  helix,  and  then  fig.  20  will  re- 
present the  result.  A  result  exceedingly 
simple,  and  in  perfect  accordance  with  the 
diamagnetic  disposition  of  the  forces  pro- 
duced by  the  helix  (2972.),  as  the  two 
dotted  lines  indicate. 

2993.  As  an  expression  of  the  facts  for 
use  in  applying  them  to  the  explanation 
and  illustration  of  natural  phsenoraena,  it 
may  be  said  in  respect  of  declination^  that 
the  helix  being  above  the  needle  in  a 
plane  having  dip,  and  therefore  above  its 
magnetic  equator,  if  on  the  east  of  a  needle 
having  north  dip,  it  will  send  the  south  or 
upper  end  west,  or  if  on  the  east  of  a  needle  having  south  dip 
(being  of  course  then  itself  inverted  (2972.)),  it  will  cause  the 
north  or  upper  end  to  pass  westward ;  seeming  to  repel  the  end 
of  the  free  needle  or  part  of  the  line  of  force  nearest  to  it.  In 
reference  to  the  inclination,  it  may  be  said,  that  the  helix  being 
above  the  needle,  tends  to  send  the  upper  end  of  the  needle  or 
line  of  force  from  it.  If  the  hehx  is  north  of  the  magnetic  axis, 
it  will  tend  to  send  the  upper  end  of  the  needle  south ;  if  it  is 
south,  the  upper  end  will  go  north.  As  in  the  case  of  the  de- 
clination, it  is  as  if  the  end  of  the  free  needle  or  line  of  force 
nearest  to  it  was  repelled.  In  fact  every  case  is  included  in  this 
result,  that  if  the  helix  be  diamagnetically  adjusted  (2975.)  for  a 
free  needle,  whether  it  is  above  or  below  the  needle,  or  on  this 
side  or  that,  the  nearest  end  of  the  needle  will  be  as  if  repelled, 
provided  the  hehx  is  not  in  a  neutral  position. 

2994.  I  repeated  all  these  experiments  with  the  helix  reversed, 
so  as  to  give  the  effect  of  a  paramagnetic  globe  of  air  (2865. 
2973.).  I  need  only  say,  that  the  effects  were  precisely  the  same 
in  nature  and  order,  only  in  the  reverse  direction.  They  will 
be  required  in  the  explication  of  the  night  and  early  morning 
actions,  due  to  the  coohng  of  the  atmosphere  (3003.  3010.). 


Nov.  1850.] 


Experimental  illustrations. 


283 


2995.  In  these  experiments,  that  the  laws  of  deflection  might 
appear  in  their  simpUcity,  the  needle  was  suspended  in  the  air, 
and  the  representation  of  the  sun's  action  carried  round  it  in  all 
directions.  But  in  nature  the  air  is  only  above  the  needle, 
and  the  earth  as  a  magnet  is  beneath  it.  In  the  natural  case 
also,  there  is  the  fixation  of  the  hues  in  the  earth  (2919.),  which 
tends,  by  holding  them  below  the  surface,  to  give  them  an  amount 
of  deflection  at  the  surface,  far  beyond  what  they  would  have  if 
they  were  as  free  to  move  in  the  earth  beneath  as  in  the  space 
above and  though  this  deflection  would  coincide  with  that 
produced  by  the  helix  alone,  still  it  was  important  to  verify  its 
effect.  I  therefore  took  a  bar  magnet  30  inches  long,  and  weak 
in  condition,  and  suspended  the  needle  above  it  in  various  parts, 
so  as  to  have  the  effect  of  north  or  south  dip  to  any  degree,  or 
no  dip  at  all  near  the  middle  parts.  The  effect  of  absence  of  air 
from  beneath  was  also  in  a  cei'tain  degree  represented ;  and  to 
make  this  point  more  striking,  I  occasionally  put  masses  of  iron 
on  and  under  the  middle  part  of  the  magnet.  The  results  with 
the  helix  were  now  influenced  greatly  in  the  amount  of  the  de- 
flection, but  not  in  the  direction.  When  the  helix  affected  the 
direction  of  the  needle,  it  was  according  to  the  above  laws. 

2996.  In  the  consideration  of  natural  phsenomena,  the  mag- 
netic axis,  and  also  the  planes  of  the  magnetic  equator  and 
meridian,  being  circles  or  planes  of  no  deflection,  are  very  im- 
portant. Changing  as  they  do  with  every  change,  either  of 
place  or  declination  or  dip,  they  require  some  ready  means  of 
illustration,  and  can  hardly  be  comprehenfled  in  their  effects 
without  a  model.  I  have  prepared  a  globe  on  which,  after 
marking  the  places  of  the  observatories,  I  have  drawn  the  mag- 
netic meridians  of  these  places  as  they  were  last  estimated.  I 
have  then  in  another  colour  drawn  for  each  place  its  magnetic 
equator,  making  that  a  great  circle  parallel  to  the  equatorial 
plane  of  the  dipping-needle  at  the  place.  I  have  also  marked 
on  the  globe  the  mean  path  of  the  sun  for  each  month,  and  by 
the  use  of  adjustible  pins  to  indicate  the  hours  before  and  after 

^  Referring  to  the  typical  globe  of  cold  air  (2874.),  it  is  manifest  that  if  the 
space  below  the  horizontal  lines  a,  c,  &c.  were  occupied  by  matter  holding  the 
lines  in  it,  then  the  deflections  now  represented  on  the  lower  parts  would 
appear  above  the  holding  surfaces,  and  to  a  much  greater  degree,  though  ex- 
tending downwards  to  a  much  smaller  space. 


284  Atmospheric  magnetism.       [Series  XXVI. 

noon  of  any  given  place,  I  have  the  means  of  ascertaining  with 
sufficient  accuracy  when  the  sun  is  in  any  particular  quadrant, 
or  what  part  of  the  quadrant ;  when  it  passes  a  neutral  line,  and 
what  its  position  in  relation  to  the  place  of  observation  is,  in  a 
manner  which  no  diagrams  or  figures  could  supply.  I  have 
found  the  globe  very  useful ;  and  I  accustom  myself  to  place  it 
always  in  a  certain  position,  namely,  with  the  axis  of  rotation 
horizontal,  the  north  pole  to  my  right  hand,  and  the  astrono- 
mical meridian  of  the  place  of  observation  towards  the  zenith. 
The  observer  can  then  regard  it  as  from  the  place  of  the  rising 
sun. 

2997.  Though  we  thus  have  the  experimental  conditions  of  a 
needle  under  an  action  like  that  resulting  in  nature  from  the 
presence  of  the  sun  (2920.),  1  do  not  pretend  that  they  can  be 
applied  without  modification  to  natural  phaenomena,  but  only 
that  they  give  very  important  aid  in  the  study  of  the  latter  and 
the  rationale  of  their  action.    The  atmosphere,  instead  of  being 
inimitable,  wraps  the  earth  round  as  a  garment ;  the  influence, 
as  it  extends  from  the  region  of  action,  must,  in  respect  of  that 
portion  which  is  conveyed  through  its  mass  (2920.),  curve  with 
its  curvature,  and  give  a  result  in  any  particular  place,  which 
only  refined  calculations  founded  upon  careful  observations  can 
determine  accurately.    In  regard  to  the  development  of  the  air 
action,  it  would,  I  think,  be  very  interesting  to  ascertain,  even 
roughly,  the  daily  variations  of  a  magnet  at  the  bottom  of  a  deep 
mine,  half-way  up,  and  at  the  mouth  of  the  shaft.    The  results 
might  tell  us  much  about  the  holding  power  of  the  earth  and  the 
depths  to  which  the  deflections  of  the  magnetic  lines  of  force 
penetrate,  and  might  even  give  us  a  rough  expression  of  the 
changes  of  the  internal  power  (or  the  absence  of  such  changes) 
when  freed  from  those  dependent  upon  the  atmosphere. 

2998  Another  reason  why  the  experimental  results  must  not 
be  applied  too  closely  is  as  follows.  If  the  lines  of  force  of  the 
earth  were  perfectly  regular,  then  the  change  produced  amongst 
them  by  the  sun  and  air  would  be  regular  also.  But  as  the 
natural  system  is  not  regular  either  between  the  tropics  as  at 
Sister's  Walk  and  Longford  in  St.  Helena,  or  m  the  higher 
latitudes,  as  at  Hudson's  Bay,  so  apparent  inconsistences  may 
and  must  result.  The  probability  is  that  the  greatest  irregula- 
rities in  the  arrangement  of  the  earth's  magnetism  are  in  and 


Nov.  1850,]  Experimental  illustrations.  285 

near  the  surface  of  the  earth,  and  that  above  they  tend  to  adjust 
with  each  other  into  a  more  regular  order.  Still  the  irregulari- 
ties must  extend  their  influence  very  far  upwards,  so  that  the 
contortions  of  the  magnetic  meridians  or  lines  of  force  are  not 
likely  to  be  effaced,  or  much  diminished,  at  the  region  coinciding 
with  the  place  of  the  atmosphere's  effect. 

2999.  But  though  the  lines  are  irregular  in  the  large  space 
affected  by  the  sun,  the  result  will  be  expansion  of  the  whole 
as  a  system  and  diamagnetic  polarity.  The  Hues  offeree  below 
will  be  affected  by  those  above ;  and  so,  though  a  perfect  simi- 
larity between  different  places  is  not  to  be  expected,  still  the 
kind  of  change  at  the  earth's  surface  is  not  likely  to  be  so  uncer- 
tain as  it  might  at  first  appear.  Therefore  I  beheve  the  globe 
(2996.)  will  be  found  very  useful  in  giving  information  regarding 
the  probable  effects  of  the  magnetic  meridian  and  equator,  due 
to  the  place  of  the  sun  in  the  two  chief  quadrants  for  any  given 
month  of  the  year,  or  hour  of  the  day. 

3000.  The  passage  of  the  magnetic  meridian  is  important,  and 
appears  far  more  so  after  the  experiment  described  (2978.)  than 
it  did  on  a  former  occasion  (2942.).    Being  very  often  inclined 
to  the  astronomical  meridian,  it  must  have  great  influence  in 
deciding  when  the  daily  declination  changes  in  its  direction. 
The  place  of  greatest  action,  and  its  travelling  north  or  south 
along  a  line  of  magnetic  force  according  as  the  declination  was 
west  or  east  in  relation  to  the  helix  as  a  sun,  was  confirmed  by 
an  experiment ;  and  the  further  observation  (a  consequence  of 
the  former),  that  when  the  sun  was  equidistant  from  a  place 
more  north  or  south  than  itself,  its  action  was  far  stronger  on 
that  side  at  which  its  path  and  the  declination  direction  made 
an  acute  angle  than  on  the  other  side  where  it  was  obtuse,  was 
also  confirmed.    Thus  if  the  hehx,  moving  from  east  to  west, 
were  passing  a  place  horth  of  it  having  western  declination, 
then  the  action  was  stronger  on  the  western  side  of  the  place  than 
on  the  east  for  equal  distances  of  the  helix  from  the  magnet. 

3001.  The  passage  of  the  magnetic  equator  by  the  sun  is  also 
important,  since  the  direction  of  the  diurnal  variation  of  the 
experimental  needle  is  then  altered;  and  this  is  of  the  more 
consequence,  because  by  the  great  degree  of  natural  declination 
in  many  places,  even  far  north  and  south,  this  passage  is  thrown 
forward  towards  the  astronomical  meridian,  either  on  the  east 


286 


Atmospheric  magnetism.        [Series  XXVI. 


side  or  the  west,  and  comes  into  effect  during  the  more  influen- 
tial hours  of  the  sun  or  the  cold.    In  all  those  places  too  where 
the  dip  is  little,  as  at  St.  Helena,  and  in  or  near  the  sun's  path, 
it  may  be  important  in  influencing  the  amount  of  action.  From 
the  change  of  place  of  the  sun  between  the  tropics,  and  the 
variety  of  dip  and  declination  at  different  places,  the  passing  of 
the  neutral  planes  by  the  sun  and  acting  region  must  take  place 
under  an  extreme  variety  of  conditions ;  the  unravelling  of  which 
I  think  will  be  much  assisted  by  knowledge  such  as  that  which 
the  preceding  experiments  and  principles  give.  The  sun  may  be 
astronomically  either  north  or  south  of  the  needle,  and  yet  the 
declination  of  the  needle  not  change  in  direction  (2980.) ;  or  if 
there  were  much  mean  declination,  as  at  Greenwich,  then  it 
might  be  astronomically  east  or  west  of  it,  and  yet  the  declina- 
tion produced  not  change  its  direction.    The  sun  region  may 
be  south  of  a  place  and  yet  send  its  upper  end  further  south 
(2990.) ;  for  all  will  depend  upon  its  position  in  relation  to  the 
magnetic  meridian  and  the  magnetic  axis,  which  are  in  most 
cases  very  far  removed  from  those  that  are  astronomical :  added 
to  all  these  causes  of  variety,  there  is  the  fixation  of  the  lines  of 
force  in  the  earth  (2919.),  which  tends  to  give  a  further  diversity 
to  them. 

3002.  In  the  former  paper  I  considered  only  the  effect  of  air 
raised  in  temperature  above  the  mean  condition  (2895.),  illus- 
trating it  by  the  sun's  effect  in  the  middle  of  the  day;  now  I 
purpose  considering  that  which  will  be  produced  by  the  cold  of 
night,  which  reduces  the  air  of  a  given  region  below  the  mean 
air  temperature  of  that  place.  When  a  portion  of  air  is  so  cooled, 
its  conduction  power  is  increased ;  in  conjunction  with  the  warmer 
air  of  surrounding  regions  it  deflects  the  hnes  of  magnetic  force 
passing  through  both,  as  indicated  by  the  type  globe  (2864.2874.), 
and  acquires  what  I  have  called  conduction  polarity  (paramag- 
netic), meaning  thereby  simply  that  the  Unes  of  force  draw  toge- 
ther in  the  middle  of  the  cooled  air. 

3003.  Theoretically,  the  effect  of  a  cold  region  of  air  coming 
up  from  the  east  would  be  to  make  the  magnetic  lines  of  force, 
as  they  leave  the  earth,  advance  or  bend  towards  it,  because 
those  in  and  about  the  cold  air  are  inflected  into  it ;  and  as  those 
immediately  west  of  the  cold  region  move  into  or  towards  it,  so 
those  further  west,  being  in  part  relieved  from  their  tension,  will 


Nov.  1850.] 


General  principles  of  action. 


287 


also  move  east,  and  thus  an  effect,  the  reverse  of  that  of  the  sun 
(2877.  2972.),  or  the  same  as  that  of  the  helix  in  the  paramag- 
netic position  (2973.  2994.),  will  be  produced.  The  upper  ends 
of  needles  at  places  having  dip  shovr  this  deflection  of  the  upper 
part  of  the  lines  of  force,  because  they  move  by,  with,  and  in 
them. 

3004.  So  as  cold  approaches,  the  lines  will  lean  towards  it 
until  it  is  in  the  position  of  maximum  action  in  the  eastern  qua- 
drant; then  they  will  return  (in  declination)  before  the  cold,  until 
both  it  and  the  line  (or  needle)  are  in  the  magnetic  meridian ; 
after  which,  as  the  cold  travels  on  westward,  the  needle  will 
follow  it  west  until  the  cold  has  attained  its  place  of  maximum 
action  in  the  west  quadrant  (2982.) ;  and  then,  as  the  cold  re- 
treats, the  needle  will  return  east  to  its  mean  place ;  assuming 
that  there  is  no  other  action  for  the  time  than  that  of  the  cold 
region.  The  upper  end  of  the  free  needle,  therefore,  at  any 
given  place  will  tend  towards  the  cold  region,  just  as  before  it 
tended  from  a  warm  region ;  and  as  the  declination  is  affected, 
so  also  the  inclination  will  be.  If  the  cold  be  on  the  magnetic 
meridian  of  a  place  within  the  tropics,  as  St.  Helena  or  Singa- 
pore, it  will  increase  the  dip  there,  whilst  at  the  same  moment 
it  is  diminishing  the  dip  at  places  south  or  north  of  it  having 
considerable  dip,  a  result  which  follows  directly  from  the  inflec- 
tion of  the  lines  of  force  into  or  towards  the  cold  region. 

3005.  The  chief  regions  of  heat  and  cold  on  the  same  parallel 
of  latitude,  do  not  follow  each  other  at  equal  intervals  of  time. 
It  is  difficult  to  make  a  judgement  regarding  their  interval  in 
the  atmosphere  above ;  but  the  maximum  of  cold  on  the  earth 
for  the  twenty-four  hours,  is  assumed  by  many  as  being  seven- 
teen hours  after  the  preceding  noon,  and  only  seven  hours  from 
the  coming  noon.  This  brings  into  consideration  the  joint  effect 
of  hot  and  cold  regions  in  deflecting  the  lines  of  force,  especially 
during  the  forenoon  and  middle  of  the  day.  If  a  cold  region  be 
only  three  and  a  half  hours  west  of  a  place  at  the  same  time  that 
the  warm  region  is  three  and  a  half  hours  east  of  it,  it  is  very 
manifest  that  the  joint  effect  of  the  two,  for  both  act  then  to 
cause  the  same  deflection,  will  be  far  greater  than  that  of  the 
heat  or  cold  alone,  or  than  any  corresponding  effect  at  other 
periods,  for  neither  twelve  hours  after,  nor  at  any  other  time 
will  there  be  an  equivalent  condition  of  circumstances ;  and  so 


ff 


288 


Atmospheric  magnetism.       [Series  XXVI. 


it  is  also  for  other  combinations  of  hot  and  cold  regions,  the 
effect  of  which  will  vary  both  by  position  and  by  their  extent. 
A  free  needle  is  held  in  tension  by  the  lines,  which  are  them- 
selves governed  by  the  hot  and  cold  regions  of  atmosphere ; 
it  probably  never  occupies  its  mean  place,  but  is  always  in 
the  resultant  of  these  ever-present  and  ever- varying  causes  of 
change. 

3006.  As  the  earth  revolves  under  the  sun,  each  place  would 
have,  speaking  generally,  a  maximum  and  a  minimum  of  tem- 
perature for  its  atmosphere  in  the  twenty- four  hours.  But 
looking  at  the  globe  as  a  whole,  there  would  be  one  maximum 
and  two  minima,  i.  e.  there  would  be  a  maximum  region  some- 
where beneath  the  sun  in  his  path,  and  a  minimupa  in  each  of 
the  polar  regions;  which,  as  regards  the  twenty-four  hours, 
would  not  be  at  the  pole,  but  in  some  place  of  high  latitude,  and 
perhaps,  as  before,  seven  or  eight  hours  before  noon.  These 
cold  regions  will  be  very  seriously  affected  in  their  extent  and 
place  and  power  by  the  position  of  the  sun  between  the  tropics  ; 
for  as  he  advances  to  one  tropic  the  cold  region  there  will  dimi- 
nish in  extent  and  force,  whilst  the  other  will  grow  up  in  im- 
portance; and  whilst  they  thus  vary  in  their  power  of  influencing 
the  general  direction  of  the  lines  of  force,  they  will  vary  in  their 
own  position  also,  and  have  at  different  times  very  various  rela- 
tions of  place  to  the  sun  in  different  months;  and  so  produce 
very  various  effects.  It  is  these  differences  which  are  made 
manifest  to  us,  as  I  beUeve,  in  the  night  and  morning  actions 
at  the  numerous  observatories  scattered  over  the  globe. 

3007.  I  will  proceed  to  apply  these  views,  and  the  additional 
knowledge  gained  by  experiment,  to  the  localities  formerly  con- 
sidered, and  to  some  new  ones  between  th,e  tropics,  for  the  pur- 
pose of  explaining,  if  I  can,  the  principles  of  night  action ;  of 
retardation,  more  or  less,  of  the  effects  in  relation  to  local  time ; 
of  the  difference  in  direction  of  the  declination  variation  in  dif- 
ferent months,  for  the  same  place  at  the  same  hours,  as  pointed 
out  by  Colonel  Sabine ;  of  the  diminution  of  dip  in  one  place, 
and  increase  of  it  at  another  for  the  same  local  time.  In  doing 
so,  it  will  be  necessary  to  refer  continually  to  that  place  which 
may  be  considered,  in  respect  of  the  station,  as  the  centre  of  hot 
or  cold  action  for  the  time.  I  will  endeavour  to  use  the  word 
region  for  that  purpose,  meaning  thereby  not  the  whole  extent 


Nov.  1850.]        Si.  Petersburgh—cold  effect.  289 

of  heated  or  warmed  air,  nor  the  centre,  but  the  chief  place  of 
the  altered  portion.  It  is  very  manifest  that  in  some  days  in 
March  or  September,  all  the  air  that  is  east  of  the  meridian  at 
21^  or  22^  may  be  considered  warm  in  comparison  of  that  which 
is  then  west  of  the  same  meridian,  and  that  a  resultant  of  action, 
which  shall  be  the  same  for  all  places,  cannot  exist. 

3008.  We  are  to  remember  that  the  eastening  and  the  west- 
ening  of  the  upper  end  of  the  needle,  of  which  I  always  speak, 
is  produced  in  two  ways.  The  needle  travels  as  positively  by 
the  withdi-awal  of  a  direct  cause  of  action  as  it  does  under  the 
immediate  direct  action  of  that  cause,  but  in  the  contrary  direc- 
tion (2982.).  A  westening  may  be  the  result  either  of  the 
coming  up  of  the  sun  on  the  east  of  the  place  of  observation,  or 
of  its  withdrawal  in  the  west,  after  he  has  passed  over  the  meri- 
dian and  produced  the  great  east  swing. 

3009.  St.  Petersburgh  has  a  mean  declination  of  6°  10'  W., 
and  a  dip  of  70°  30'  N. ;  therefore,  though  the  magnetic  and 
astronomical  meridians  are  not  very  oblique  to  each  other,  still 
the  sun  or  warm  region  reaches  the  former  from  20'  to  40'  before 
the  latter,  and  hence  the  time  of  the  great  sun-swing,  which  is 
from  20  to  1  o'clock,  is  made  earlier  than  it  otherwise  would  be. 
The  magnetic  equator  of  the  needle  (2977-)  forms  an  angle  of 
about  40°  wuth  the  earth's  equator,  and  being  thus  tilted,  it 
disposes  the  two  quadrants  chiefly  concerned  in  the  daily  varia- 
tion (2979.),  so,  that  in  the  St.  Petersburgh  summer  the  warmest 
region  is  not  only  far  nearer  to  the  needle,  but  passes  through 
the  strongest  places  of  action  of  the  quadrants,  whereas  in  winter 
it  is  further  off,  and  also  in  much  weaker  positions.  Hence  a 
cause,  as  I  believe,  of  the  great  difference  in  the  amount  of  va- 
riation of  declination,  and  also  of  its  character  :  in  November, 
December  and  January,  it  is  from  4'*47  to  4'-65  only,  whilst 
in  June  it  is  ll''52^  See  the  Tables,  p.  271,  and  the  Curves, 
Plate  II. 

3010.  In  December  or  January,  being  St.  Petersburgh  winter, 

*  The  eastening  and  westening  of  a  free  dipping-needle  are  not  properly 
represented  by  the  movements  of  a  horizontal  needle,  inasmuch  as  at  places 
with  different  dip  the  angle  is  read  off  on  planes  differently  inclined  to  the  dip 
itself,  and  in  high  latitudes  the  effect  is  greatly  exaggerated.  But  though 
different  places  may  not  be  compared  without  a  correction,  the  variations  for 
the  same  place  as  St.  Petersburgh  are  comparable  and  proportionate. 
VOL.  III.  U 


290 


Atmospheric  magnetism.     [Series  XXVII. 


the  sun-swing  east  almost  disappears.    It  is  over  by  1  o'clock^, 
after  which  the  upper  end  of  the  needle  follows  the  sun  until  9'^, 
having  passed  its  mean  position  at        It  then  stops,  after  which 
it  moves  east  until  IG'^  or  17^;  then  again  stops,  or  nearly  so, 
until  21^,  and  then  the  sun-swing  comes  on,  carrying  it  to  ex- 
treme east.    So  here  there  are  two  very  important  points  to 
explain,  namely,  why  the  needle  moves  eastward  after  9^,  and 
why  it  does  not  travel  westward  from  13^  to  20*^,  but,  on  the 
contrary,  is  travelling  eastwards  or  standing  still :  the  explana- 
tion, according  to  my  view,  is  as  foUow^s : — St.  Petersburgh  is  a 
place  in  which,  from  its  position,  the  upper  cold,  consequent 
upon  the  daily  withdrawal  of  the  sun,  would  produce  a  para- 
magnetic action  (2994.  3003.).    This  action,  as  the  sun  set, 
would  begin  to  appear  on  the  east,  and  I  conclude  that  at  9^-11^ 
the  cold  region  coming  up  from  the  east,  not  on  the  latitude  of 
the  sun^s  path,  which  is  far  to  the  south,  but  probably  near  to 
that  of  St.  Petersburgh  itself,  is  able  at  9-11  o'clock,  during 
which  the  needle  is  stationary,  to  counteract  any  remaining 
tendency  w^estward,  and  after  that  to  draw  the  line  of  force  and 
the  needle  end  eastward  until  17  o'clock,  and  to  hold  it  there, 
after  which  the  sun  sends  it  eastward  in  the  great  swing.  That 
the  cold,  considering  its  probable  position,  may  well  direct  the 
needle  end  eastward  till  17^,  and  the  sun  region  not  send  it 
westward  from  17^  to  20^  or  21^,  is  seen,  I  think,  to  be  a  very 
natural  consequence  of  the  probable  position  of  the  two  regions 
between  these  hours.  For  letting  the  sun  (whose  place  we  know) 
represent  the  warm  region  at  17^,  he  is  then  in  the  eastern  qua- 
drant below  the  horizon,  so  that  if  he  could  affect  the  needle 
through  or  round  the  earth  (2995.),  it  would  be  to  easten  it,  and 
it  continues  in  that  quadrant  until  19^.    Then  at  19^,  when  he 
enters  the  quadrant,  in  which  he  begins  to  exert  a  westening 
action  on  the  sun,  he  is  in  such  a  position  as  respects  the  needle 
at  St.  Petersburgh  (as  is  seen  by  a  line  drawn  over  the  surface  of 
the  globe  (2996.)  and  compared  with  the  magnetic  meridian  and 
dip),  and  in  so  inefficient  a  part  of  the  quadrant  (2982.),  and 
also  so  far  off,  that  it  has  no  power  to  send  the  needle  west- 
ward, but  only  in  association  with  the  retreating  cold  region  to 

'  The  St.  Petersburgh  observations  are  at  21^  minutes  after  each  hour  ;  but 
I  mention  the  hour  without  the  minutes  as  sufficient  for  a  general  statement. 


Nov.  1850.]     St.  Petersburgh—cold  effect  at  night.  291 

hold  it  there,  until  at  21'',  or  thereabout,  the  sun-swing  from 
west  to  east  occurs  as  in  other  cases.  After  this  the  needle 
follows  the  sun  from  1  o'clock,  being,  as  the  hours  advance, 
gradually  arrested  and  taken  up  by  the  cold  region  of  the  next 
twenty-four  hours,  as  already  described. 

3011.  I  have  considered  the  cold  eastening  as  continued  until 
as  late  as  17^  which  would  imply  probably  that  until  that  hour 
the  cold  region  was  east  of  St.  Petersburgh.  It  is  very  difficult 
to  speak,  even  in  a  general  manner,  of  the  places  or  times  of 
things  so  little  identified  as  yet,  as  the  warm  and  cold  regions  in 
the  upper  atmosphere ;  but  referring  to  the  temperatures  on  the 
earth  at  St.  Petersburgh,  I  may  point  out,.that  the  extreme  cold 
is,  in  the  month  of  January,  as  late  as  19  and  20  o'clock,  and 
five  hours  later  than  it  is  in  the  summer  months.  I  may  also 
point  out  here,  for  use  in  the  summer  months,  that  the  maximum 
heat  varies  three  hours  in  the  opposite  direction ;  so  that  whilst 
from  the  highest  to  the  lowest  temperature  in  the  day  is  only 
eleven  hours  in  summer,  it  is  nineteen  hours  in  winter,  as  may 
be  seen  by  the  Temperature  Table,  p.  271.  As  the  day  comes 
on,  therefore,  in  January  the  highest  temperature  is  only  five 
hom's  after  the  lowest,  which  accords  generally  with  the  assumed 
cause  of  the  effects  on  the  needled 

3012.  As  I  am  endeavouring  to  make  St.  Petersburgh  a  gene- 
ral case  of  night  action  for  the  explanation  of  corresponding- 
effects  at  other  places,  so  I  may  notice  that  the  night  action 
must  contain  a  portion  of  tun  effect  which  combines  with  that 
of  the  cold.  The  action  of  the  sun  is  known  by  observation  to 
be  very  extended  ;  in  the  case  of  St.  Petersburgh,  the  sun,  when 
at  the  southern  tropic  and  on  the  meridian,  is  between  80°  and 
90°  from  the  station,  and  yet  we  see  by  the  observations  and 
curves  how  large  an  effect  he  produces  (3009.).  Wherever  the 
sun  may  be,  he  is  by  his  motion  causing  changes  which  are  felt 
simultaneously  over  the  whole  globe;  and  at  9  and  10  o'clock  he 
is  in  an  effectual  part  of  that  quadrant  which  would  send  the 

'  In  relation  to  the  cold  of  the  upper  atmosphere  and  the  occurrence  of  its 
maximum  (at  certain  levels  at  least),  not  at  midnight  but  hours  after,  how 
often  do  we  in  this  country  see  a  clear  bright  night,  and  then  just  before  the 
sun  rises,  the  formation  of  a  veil  of  clouds  high  up,  and,  upon  his  appearing, 
their  dissolution  and  passing  away !  In  these  cases  the  clouds  show  the  time 
of  greatest  cold  above  by  their  formation,  and  by  their  dissolution  its  quick 
reversion  and  change  into  increasing  warmth. 

u  2 


292 


Atmospheric  magnetism.    [Series  XXVIl. 


needle  eastward  if  the  earth  were  replaced  by  air,  and  in  the 
representative  experiments  with  a  helix  (2995.)  does  so  send  it 
eastward  when  a  magnet  is  interposed.  The  night  action  ought 
therefore  to  be  greatest  in  winter,  as  it  is,  because  the  cold  is 
then  most  intense,  and  also  because  the  action  of  the  distant  sun 
coincides  with  it.  It  is  very  probable  that  many  of  the  curious 
contortions  of  the  night  action  which  appear  in  the  curves  of 
Hobarton,  Toronto  and  elsewhere,  may  depend  upon  the  manner 
in  which,  at  different  hours,  these  two  causes  (probably  with 
others)  combine  together. 

3013.  Though  the  declination  varies  little  or  nothing  between 
17^  and  21^,  no  westening  then  appearing  (3010.),  still  I  should 
expect  a  marked  action  on  the  inclination  at  that  time,  and  con- 
clude that  it  will  be  on  the  increase ;  but  1  have  not  been  able 
to  obtain  a  table  of  the  daily  variation  of  inclination. 

3014.  In  the  month  of  February  the  same  remarks  apply; 
but  as  the  sun  is  now  coming  from  the  southern  signs  and 
drawing  nearer  to  St.  Petersburgh  its  power  is  increasing,  and 
this  is  shown  by  making  the  cold  eastening  for  15^,  16^  and  17^ 
less  in  extent  than  before  by  more  than  half  a  minute  (of  a  de- 
gree), and  by  absolutely  overcoming  it  and  making  a  return 
westwards  between  17^^  and  18^  before  the  swing  to  the  east 
comes  on.  In  March  the  effect  is  still  more  striking ;  the  para- 
magnetic eastening  is  arrested  at  14^  and  the  following  diamag- 
netic  westening  extends  to  20^;  then  follows  the  swing.  In 
April  the  westening  by  the  warm  region  is  as  early  as  13^  and 
continues  to  20^  being  very  strong.  It  is  interesting  to  look  at 
the  Table  of  Temperatures  for  these  months,  even  as  they  are 
obtained  at  the  earth's  surface.  As  the  months  come  on  the 
eastening  from  the  cold  ceases  sooner  and  sooner,  being  in 
January  and  April  17^  and  13^  respectively.  The  minimum  of 
temperature  also  retreats,  being  for  the  same  month  20^^  and  16\ 
On  the  contrary,  the  maximum  of  heat  advances  from  the  wmter 
to  the  summer  months,  being  also  greatly  increased;  and  the 
efiect  on  the  sun-swing  is  seen  both  in  the  advanced  time  of 
change  and  the  increased  amount  of  variation. 

3015.  In  May  and  June  the  night  or  cold  eastening  has  dis- 
appeared, or  is  shown  only  by  a  little  hesitation;  and  from 
midnight  the  coming  on  of  the  sun  region  sets  the  needle  end 
west.    If  we  look  at  the  globe  (2996.),  we  should  be  led  to  ex- 


Nov.  1850.]    St.  Petersburgh—cold  effect  at  night.  293 


pect  that  it  would  do  this.  The  sun  is  then  in  the  northern 
tropic  nearly,  wheeling  round  St.  Petersburgh  and  comparatively- 
near  to  it ;  and  a  free  dipping-needle  would  in  twenty-four  hours 
make  one  revolution  in  the  same  direction  as  the  sun  region, 
but  at  the  opposite  end  of  the  line,  joining  the  two  together.  If 
the  needle  were  at  the  astronomical  pole  of  the  earth,  having 
great  dip,  it  would  describe  almost  a  circle  with  nearly  uniform 
motion ;  but  being  really  much  nearer  to  the  warm  region  in 
one  part  of  the  uniform  daily  course  of  the  latter  than  another, 
the  radius  vector  joining  it  with  the  region  then  makes  a  much 
greater  angle  in  a  given  time  than  when  it  is  further  off,  and 
hence  the  greater  rapidity  of  the  motion  between  20^  and  1^, 
and  the  production  of  what  I  have  familiarly  called  the  sun- 
swing  from  west  to  east. 

3016.  It  will  be  seen  from  the  Table  of  Curves  (Plate  II.), 
that  we  have  at  St.  Petersburgh  a  fine  example  of  that  kind  of 
result  which  Colonel  Sabine  called  attention  to  so  strongly  in 
his  paper  upon  the  St.  Helena  pheenomena';  and  those  oc- 
curring at  Hobarton,  Toronto  and  elsewhere ;  namely,  a  declina- 
tion variation  in  different  directions  for  the  same  hours  in  different 
months.  Thus,  in  the  present  case,  the  needle  end  goes  east- 
Avard  for  the  hours  13^  to  20^  in  October,  November,  December, 
January  and  February,  whilst  it  goes  west  for  the  same  hours 
in  April,  May,  June,  July  and  August:  March  and  September 
curves  fall  midway.  But  this  difference  is  now  I  hope  by  the 
hypothesis  accounted  for  (3010.  3015.),  and  I  trust  that  equally 
satisfactory  reasons  will  appear  for  St.  Helena  (3045.)  and  other 
places  (3022.  3039.  3065.). 

3017-  The  paramagnetic  character  of  the  eastening  effect  by 
cold  in  the  winter  months  after  10  o^clock,  would  probably  be 
illustrated  by  inclination  observations  for  the  same  time ;  for  if 
the  cold  region  passes  to  the  south  of  St.  Petersburgh  the  incli- 
nation will  be  decreased  by  the  paramagnetic  action,  but  increased 
by  the  diamagnetic  resultant ;  and  the  manner  in  which  these 
two  elements  of  direction,  i.  e.  inclination  and  declination,  are 
combined  at  any  given  moment,  is  very  important  to  the  full 
elucidation  of  the  magnetic  effect  of  the  atmosphere.  I  have 
not  been  able  to  give  these  data  for  St.  Petersburgh.  The 
total  force  variations  would  also  help  greatly  to  clear  up  the 
'  Philosophical  Transactions,  1847,  p.  51. 


294 


Atmosjjfieric  magnetism.    [Series  XXVII. 


subject.  Indeed  it  is  not  fair  to  endeavour  to  explain  the  re- 
sults of  the  assigned  cause  by  taking  only  one  element  of  three 
into  consideration.  What  we  require  ultimately  to  know,  is  all 
the  changes  of  a  free  needle  in  position  and  in  respect  of  power. 
All  are  important,  and  all  should  be  considered  at  once.  I  pre- 
sume that  the  theory  of  the  variations  cannot  advance  very  far 
without  their  joint  consideration, 

3018.  Greenwich  presents  a  fine  case  of  the  night  episode,  and 
the  different  directions  of  the  magnetic  variation  for  the  same 
hours  in  different  months.    In  these  respects  it  is  very  much 
like  St.  Petersburg!!,  but  has  great  additional  interest,  because 
of  the  large  western  declination^,  and  the  effect  produced  by  it 
on  the  places  of  the  active  quadrants  (2979.  3000.),  and  the 
times  of  the  variation  phaenomena.    On  setting  up  its  position 
on  the  globe  (2996.),  it  will  be  seen  that  the  equatorial  plane  is 
not  likely  to  be  much  concerned  in  the  midday  action,  and  that 
the  sun  or  warm  region  passes  nearly  across  the  middle  of  the 
two  chief  quadrants  in  summer ;  which  with  its  nearness  at  the 
same  time,  ought  to  make  the  midday  swing  to  east  very  great. 
In  winter  it  is  further  off  and  in  much  weaker  parts  of  the  qua- 
drant, so  that  the  swing  ought  to  be  far  less,  and  such  is  the 
case.    The  greatest  summer  variation  is  ll'-30,  and  the  least 
winter  variation  only  5'-8S.    In  April,  May,  June,  July  and 
August,  the  great  west -declination  of  the  south  or  upper  end  of 
the  needle  is  at  19^^  20',  and  the  chief  east  position  at  l'^  20'. 
The  latter  position  remains  the  same  all  the  year  round,  but  the 
extreme  westening  is  in  the  other  seven  (cold)  months  at  9^^  20' 
and  1 20'^,  or  verging  towards  midnight ;  it  then  surpassing  the 
morning  west  deflection.    Thus  the  sun's  effect  in  summer,  in 
weakening  the  cold  night  effect  (3005.),  is  very  evident ;  and  so 
also  is  the  manner  in  which  the  night  action  grows  up,  until  very 
prominent,  in  the  winter  months,  through  the  strengthening  of 
the  cold  action  (3006.),  when  the  sun  is  towards  the  southern 
tropic  and  in  the  weaker  parts  of  the  segments.    The  assumed 
principles  of  this  action  have  been  already  given  in  the  case  of 
St.  Petersburgh  (3010.  &c.). 

1  Mean  declination  22°  51' W.    Mean  inclination  69°  N. 

2  See  the  Curves,  Plate  II.  The  observations  arc  only  for  every  two  hours, 
so  that  no  degree  of  nicety  can  be  expected  in  assigning  the  time  of  any  given 
change. 


Nov.  1850.]     Greenwich — day  and  night  effect.  295 

3019.  The  magnetic  meridian  is  much  to  the  east  of  the  astro- 
nomical meridian,  where  the  warm  region  passes  it,  especially  in 
winter,  for  then  the  sun  crosses  it  about  10  o'clock,  and  in  sum- 
mer about  1 1  o'clock.  Hence  the  swing  ought  to  be  earlier  in 
winter  than  in  summer,  though,  because  of  the  slower  angular 
motion  of  the  warm  region  in  relation  to  Greenwich  (3015.),  it 
ought  then  to  occupy  a  longer  time;  and  yet,  as  above  said 
(3018.),  be,  by  reason  of  distance,  of  smaller  amount.  All  this 
appears  to  accord  remarkably  with  the  fact.  The  swing  beging 
at  17^^  in  the  winter  but  not  until  19^  in  the  summer,  and  ending 
at  the  same  hour  at  both  seasons,  namely,  1  o'clock,  is  much 
longer  in  its  occurrence  in  winter  than  in  summer.  It  begins 
earlier,  because  the  magnetic  meridian  is  sooner  passed  than  in 
summer ;  and  the  reason  also  appears  why  the  extension  in  time 
is  at  the  beginning  rather  than  at  the  termination  of  the  swing ; 
for,  because  of  the  declination,  the  warm  region  is  at  the  same 
hours  much  less  east  of  the  magnetic  meridian  in  the  morning 
and  much  further  west  of  it  in  the  afternoon,  in  winter  than  in 
summer;  hence  the  swing  is  thrown  forward  in  time  in  winter; 
and  though  prolonged,  its  termination  coincides  with  the  ter- 
mination in  summer,  as  far  at  least  as  these  two-hour  observa- 
tions can  indicate. 

3020.  As  the  region  precedes  the  sun,  the  degree  of  mean  de- 
clination here  ought  to  make  the  day-swing  come  on  early,  i.  e. 
earlier  than  at  Hobarton,  and  especially  earlier  than  at  Toronto, 
unless  other  causes  of  variation  interfere.  Now  the  beginning 
is  earlier  than  at  Toronto,  but  the  end  the  same.  Both  the 
beginning  and  the  end  is  an  hour  earlier  than  at  Hobarton. 
The  latter  difference  I  believe  due  to  the  difference  of  mean  de- 
clination :  at  Toronto,  I  think  we  shall  find  another  cause  in- 
fluencing the  time  (3032.). 

3021.  We  are  to  remember  also  that  in  winter  the  sun  or 
warm  region  passes  the  magnetic  meridian  two  hours  before  he 
passes  the  astronomical  meridian;  and  therefore  his  effect  in 
giving  west  position  to  the  south  or  upper  end  of  the  needle 
ceases  long  before  it  does  in  summer,  and  perhaps  even  before 
it  ceases  to  come  nearer ;  and  so  the  eastern  after-effect  on  it 
ought  to  be  greater,  which  it  is.  This  eastern  effect  should  be 
strengthened  also,  because  the  action  of  the  warm  region  on  the 
needle  ought  to  be  comparatively  great  after  passing  the  mag- 


296 


Atmospheric  magnetism.    [Series  XXVII. 


netic  meridian ;  for  its  path  forms  an  obtuse  angle  with  the 
meridian  before  the  passage  and  an  acute  one  afterwards  (3000.), 
and  therefore  is  more  powerful.  To  all  these  causes  of  action 
will  be  added  the  effect  for  the  time  of  the  cold  in  the  distant 
west  (3005.). 

3022.  The  case  of  difference  of  direction  before  19^  (3016.)  is 
very  marked  at  Greenwich,  as  may  be  seen  by  looking  at  the 
Curves  for  the  months,  Plate  II.  The  south  or  upper  end  of 
the  needle  goes  west  in  May,  June,  July  and  August,  from 
12^  to  19^,  i.  e.  from  midnight  to  five  hours  before  noon; 
but  in  October,  November,  December  and  January,  it  is  east- 
ening  at  the  same  hours.  Considering  first  a  summer  month, 
as  June,  the  upper  end  of  the  needle  is  westward  as  the  sun 
comes  onward  (as  it  ought  to  be)  until  19^,  when  he  is  almost 
in  the  middle  of  his  passage  through  the  east  quadrant ;  and  in 
respect  of  distance  and  angular  relation  to  the  magnetic  meridian, 
the  warm  region  is  then,  probably,  in  the  place  of  greatest  power 
to  produce  westening  of  the  needle  end'.  In  the  next  six  hours 
the  needle  passes  to  extreme  east,  performing,  according  to  the 
observations,  a  fourth  of  the  whole  swing  in  the  first  two  hours, 
a  half  in  the  next  two,  and  a  fourth  in  the  remaining  two,  the 
journey  being  no  doubt  with  first  rapidly  increasing  and  then 
rapidly  diminishing  velocity.  In  this  transit  of  the  region,  the 
sun  is  for  about  two-thirds  of  the  time  in  the  eastern  quadrant, 
and  one-  third  in  the  western ;  and  his  path  in  the  latter  third 
forms  almost  the  base  of  an  equilateral  triangle  with  Greenwich, 
having  the  magnetic  meridian  for  one  side,  so  that  all  that  time 
it  is  close  to  and  therefore  has  strong  action  on  the  needle  (3000.). 
The  sun  is  at  1^  in  such  a  position  as  respects  this  angle,  that  if 
we  assume  the  region  to  be  somewhat  in  advance  of  it,  the  latter 
would  be  in  that  place  where  it  could  exert  its  maximum  east- 
ening  effect ;  and  therefore  after  that,  as  it  recedes  westwai'ds, 
would  let  the  needle  return  from  east  to  west,  as  it  does,  fol- 
lowing it.  The  needle  continues  to  go  west,  passing  its  meati 
place  for  the  month  about  7^ ;  in  the  meantime,  before  that,  at 
a  little  after  6  o'clock,  the  sun  has  left  the  w  estern  segment  by 

'  It  must  not  be  forgotten,  that  the  return  from  an  extreme  east  or  west 
position  is  not  when  the  sun  or  warm  region  passes  by  a  neutral  line,  or  from 
one  quadrant  to  another,  but  when  it  passes  its  point  of  greatest  action  in  a 
quadrant  (2982,). 


Nov.  1850.]     Greenwich — day  and  night  effect.  297 

passing  the  magnetic  equator ;  it  has  not  yet  set  to  Greenwich, 
and  if  it  have  any  action,  it  will,  because  of  the  segment  it  is 
now  in  (2979.),  still  be  to  carry  the  needle  end  westward.  The 
end  in  fact  continues  to  go  westward,  slowly  only,  after  10  o'clock, 
gaining  a  little  from  lO'^  to  15^ ;  and  then,  as  the  sun  comes  up, 
passing  more  rapidly  west,  as  it  ought  to  do,  until  19^,  and 
finally  making  the  great  swing  to  the  east  as  before.  The  whole 
progression  here  is  very  simple,  and  apparently  a  natural  result 
of  the  assumed  cause.  Effects  of  cooling  no  doubt  come  in ; 
but  the  cold  region  has  diminished  in  intensity  and  extent 
(3006.),  has  retreated  northward,  and  its  action  appears  in  com- 
bining with  the  former  to  produce  only  variations  in  the  velocity 
of  the  change. 

3023.  Then  for  the  winter,  let  us  consider  January ;  and,  as 
the  eastening  is  a  maximum  in  all  the  months  at  1  o'clock,  after 
the  sun's  passage  across  the  meridian,  let  us  begin  the  cycle 
there.    At  1^  the  upper  end  of  the  needle  is  at  extreme  east, 
and  the  amount  of  the  variation  not  half  what  it  was  in  summer, 
the  sun  being  now  far  off.    The  sun  and  wai*m  region  pass  the 
magnetic  meridian  about  21^  or  22^;  and  therefore,  in  the  hours 
before  and  after  that,  should  produce  the  full  west  to  east  effect. 
At  1  o'clock  the  needle  returns  west,  following  the  retreating  sun, 
and  does  so  quickly  for  seven  or  eight  hours,  or  up  to  9^^, 
during  which  time  the  warm  region,  and  also  the  early  morning 
cold  region,  are  in  quadrants  and  positions,  which,  if  they  have 
any  action  at  all  like  that  referred  to  in  the  experiments  (2975. 
2995.),  would  then  set  or  hold  the  needle  end  west  of  its  mean 
position.    Then  an  action  of  the  following  kind  supervenes ;  the 
needle  remains  stationary  until  11^,  after  which  it  goes  east  at 
midnight  and  until  15^ ;  again  remains  stationary,  or  nearly  so, 
for  two  hours ;  then  eastens  again,  slowly  at  first  and  afterwards 
more  rapidly,  until  1^,  when  it  has  attained  its  maximum  east- 
ening and  the  place  from  whence  it  set  out. 

3024.  This  night  action  is  another  case  of  the  action  of  a  cold 
region  like  that  considered  in  respect  of  St.  Petersburgh  (3010.). 
It  appears  to  me  that  at  \\^  the  immediate  sun  action  and  return 
west  after  it,  were  over ;  that  the  cold  region  which  was  coming 
round  from  the  east  did  then  act  by  its  paramagnetic  condition 
(combined  with  the  complementary  effects  of  the  sun's  action 
on  the  other  side  of  the  globe),  and  set  the  needle  eastward,  as 


298 


Atmospheric  magnetism.    [Series  XXVII. 


it  would  be  competent  to  do  (2994.  3010.)  until  or  15^  In 
eastening,  the  needle  does  not  arrive  at  the  mean  place,  but  is 
still  l'  west  of  it ;  and  the  reason  why  it  hangs  there  from  15^ 
to  17^  and  then  begins  to  go  east  again,  more  and  more  under 
the  sun^s  action,  is  probably  that,  as  the  sun  rises  in  the  southern 
tropics,  his  distance  and  position  bring  the  resulting  distant 
warm  region  gradually  into  action  with  that  of  the  nearer  cold ; 
that  at  first  he  stops  the  action  of  the  latter,  and  then  as  he  ad- 
vances combines  with  and  finally  replaces  it ;  causing  the  usual 
swing  to  come  on,  slowly  at  first  and  then  quickly,  from  west  to 
east  by  1^.  How  this  would  happen  is  well  seen,  both  as  re- 
spects the  place  of  the  sun  in  the  southern  hemisphere,  and  in 
the  two  magnetic  segments,  by  reference  to  the  globe  (2996.) 
and  the  diagram  of  the  curves  of  variation,  Plate  II. 

3025.  Considering  another  and  an  intermediate  month  as 
March ;  at  1^  the  upper  end  of  the  needle  is  at  extreme  east ; 
then  until  9^  it  follows  the  sun  as  before  (3023.).  From  9^  to 
1 1^  it  is  stationary ;  then  the  paramagnetic  action  of  cold  from 
the  east  occurs,  and  the  needle  moves  east  until  13^.  It  is  then 
stopped,  and  two  hours  sooner  than  before ;  for  the  sun  now  ap- 
pears to  Greenwich  as  early  as  6  o'clock,  and  in  a  more  favour- 
able position  for  effect,  both  as  regards  the  magnetic  meridian 
and  the  segment  in  which  it  has  for  the  time  its  place ;  and  so 
the  needle  is  actually  sent  west  for  a  couple  of  hours.  It  is  then 
almost  held  steady  until  19^,  after  which  the  great  sun- swing 
occurs.  The  holding  west  and  yet  the  absence  of  more  west- 
ening  between  15^  and  19^,  is  not  inconsistent  with  the  southern 
place  of  the  warm  region,  and  it  is  probable  that  at  that  time  the 
dip  is  increasing ;  an  effect  which  would  accord  very  harmoniously 
with  the  condition  of  matters  at  the  time. 

3026.  Other  months  are  on  this  or  that  side  of  March  in 
respect  of  their  effects  ;  the  corresponding  month  on  the  opposite 
side  of  the  year  (September)  is  the  same  as  March,  except  in 
that  portion  of  effect  which  is  consequent  upon  a  month  follow- 
ing one  that  is  warmer  or  colder  than  itself  (3053.).  Greenwich 
therefore  satisfactorily  illustrates  the  application  of  the  hypothesis 
to  the  case  of  a  difference  in  direction  for  the  same  hour  in  dif- 
ferent months  (3016.  3022.);  and  also  the  occurrence  of  the 
night  effect,  and  its  transition  into  the  very  marked  eastening  of 
the  early  morning. 


Nov.  1850.]  Hobarton— Toronto.  299 

3027.  The  cases  of  Hobarton  and  Toronto  are  so  similar, 
though  in  opposite  hemispheres,  that  they  may  be  considered 
too-ether.  A  very  important  comparison  of  the  phsenomena  at 
both  places  has  been  already  made  by  Colonel  Sabine  in  relation 
to  the  variations  of  declination,  inclination,  and  total  forced 
When  examined  by  the  globe  (2996.)  the  distribution  of  the 
quadrants  is  nearly  alike,  the  sun  being  in  two  chief  east  and 
west  quadrants,  from  about  18  to  6  o'clock,  or  during  the  day. 
The  sun  is  in  more  influential  parts  of  the  quadrants  in  summer 
than  in  winter,  and  the  effect  is  seen  in  the  difference  of  the 
amount  of  declination  variation.  At  Hobarton  it  is  12''05  in 
summer  and  only  3'-6  in  winter.  At  Toronto  it  is  14'  in  summer 
and  5'*2  in  winter.  The  night  action  at  both  is  alike  in  character, 
and  has  been  sufficiently  explained  according  to  the  hypothesis 
in  the  former  cases  (3010.  3024.). 

3028.  Colonel  Sabine  has  given  the  data  by  whicn  the  varia- 
tions of  the  inchnation  and  of  the  total  force  at  Hobarton  and 
Toronto  may  be  compared  with  and  applied  to  the  hypothesis ; 
but  I  hesitate  to  enter  upon  them  in  this  general  view,  inasmuch 
as  these  and  the  declination  variations  should  be  closely  con- 
sidered and  compared  together  at  every  hour  for  each  particular 
place.    The  inclination  variation  at  Hobarton  is  greatest  in  its 
summer,  being  then  2'-18,  and  least  in  winter,  or  l'-28,  as  was 
to  be  expected.    The  great  variation  occurs  in  the  daytime,  as 
with  the  declination ;  the  dip  being  most  as  the  sun  region  passes 
over  the  meridian.    The  greatest  dip  is  not  at  the  same  hour  for 
all  the  months ;  it  occurs  at  23  o'clock  for  December,  February 
and  March,  at  24  o'clock  for  September,  at  1  o'clock  for  June 
and  July  ;  as  it  moves  on  so  do  the  points  of  least  dip  on  each 
side  of  it,  so  that  the  whole  curve  advances  in  time  in  the  order 
of  these  months.    There  is  also  another  affection  of  it,  for  the 
quickest  transition  is  from  most  to  least  dip  in  some  months,  as 
December,  February,  and  from  least  to  most  dip  in  other  months, 
as  June,  July,  September.  At  Toronto  the  dip  variation,  though 
peculiar  in  some  points,  may  be  said  to  have  the  same  general 
character. 

3029.  For  the  variation  of  the  total  force  at  both  places,  I  will 

'  Hobarton  Observations,  1850,  vol.  i.  p.  Ixviii.,  &c.  ;  also  Philosophical 
Transactions,  1847,  p.  55,  and  1850,  pp.  '201,  215,  &c.  See  the  Curves, 
Plate  II.,  and  Tables  for  Toronto,  pp.  269,  270. 


300 


Atmospheric  magnetism.    [Series  XXVII. 


at  present  only  refer  to  Colonel  Sabine's  volumes,  and  the  ob- 
servations he  has  made  thereon. 

3030.  There  is  a  remarkable  difference  between  the  time  of 
the  day  changes  at  Hobarton  and  Toronto,  to  which  Colonel 
Sabine  has  called  attention.  It  consists  in  the  occurrence  of 
those  at  the  latter  place,  about  an  hour  before  those  of  the  former. 
If  this  had  depended  upon  the  declination,  then  the  change 
should  have  taken  place  first  at  Hobarton,  for  there  the  sun 
arrives  at  the  magnetic  meridian  before  he  comes  to  the  astro- 
nomical meridian,  and  for  like  hours  of  local  time  he  is  in  a 
better  position  in  the  quadrant  in  the  afternoon  than  at  Toronto ; 
still  it  is  the  later  of  the  two. 

3031.  If  the  time  of  the  sun-swing  from  west  to  east  be  con- 
sidered, the  middle  of  it  ought  to  be  somewhere  near  the  period 
when  the  warm  region  is  passing  the  magnetic  meridian  (2982.), 
and  in  that  way  supplies  an  approximative  expression  of  the 
relative  positions  of  the  region  and  the  sun.  The  swing  is  at 
Hobarton  from  21  to  2  o'clock,  or  five  hours,  and  the  magnetic 
meridian  is  passed  by  the  sun  nearly  in  the  middle  of  the  time, 
or  23^  20'  o'clock.  But  according  to  the  supposition  just  made, 
this  is  also  the  time  at  which  the  warm  region  ought  also  to  pass, 
and  so  the  sun  and  the  region  in  this  place  appear  to  arrive  at 
the  meridian  together.  At  Toronto  the  sun-swing  is  about  four 
hours  in  winter,  or  from  21  to  1  o'clock,  and  five  hours  in  sum- 
mer, or  from  20  to  1  o'clock.  Of  the  latter  five  hours  the  middle 
is  22^  o'clock,  at  which  time  the  region  ought  to  pass  over  the 
magnetic  meridian,  and  as  that  coincides  nearly  with  the  astro- 
nomical meridian,  it  appears  that  the  region  is  about  1^  hour 
before  the  sun.  By  a  similar  comparison  for  winter,  the  region 
would  then  appear  to  be  about  an  hour  before  the  sun^ 

3032.  I  am  inclined  to  refer  much  of  this  precession  of  the 
warm  region  at  Toronto  to  the  geographical  distribution  of  land 
and  water  there.  The  Atlantic  is  on  the  east  and  the  continent 
of  America  on  the  west  of  the  station,  and  as  Dove's  charts  and 
results  intimate,  the  temperature  may  rise  higher  and  sooner 

^  In  reference  to  the  position  in  advance  of  the  sun,  of  the  resultant  of  those 
actions  which  set  the  needle  end  westward,  we  must  remember  that  the  preceding 
cold,  being  perhaps  seven  hours  only  to  the  west,  is  by  its  action  on  the  general 
system  of  the  curves  aiding  the  wcstening  of  the  needle,  whilst  the  sun  is  in 
the  east  and  even  over  the  meridian  (3005.). 


Nov.  1850.]  Hobarton— Toronto.  301 

over  the  land  than  over  the  water,  and  so  throw  the  warm  region 
in  respect  of  Toronto  in  advance  of  the  time  or  of  the  sun.  In 
the  case  of  Hobarton  the  arrangement  is  different ;  and,  in  fact, 
what  land  there  is  is  between  the  advancing  sun  and  the  station, 
and  would  tend  to  hold  the  warm  air  region  back,  and  tend  to 
cause  its  time  to  coincide  with  that  of  the  sun.  Even  the  greater 
difference  in  summer  than  in  winter  at  Toronto  appears  to  be 
explicable  in  the  same  manner,  by  reference  to  the  relative  posi- 
tion of  the  sun  at  the  two  seasons  to  the  land  and  water  arrange- 
ment. 

3033.  Though  the  temperature  on  the  earth's  surface  is  a  very 
uncertain  indication  of  that  above  (2937. )i  yet  as  far  as  it  goes 
it  harmonizes  with  this  view.  The  maximum  temperature  oc- 
curs sooner  after  midday  at  Hobarton  than  at  Toronto ;  in  the 
former  place  it  is  at  2  o'clock  and  very  regular,  and  the  mini- 
mum at  16-19  o'clock,  being  earlier  in  summer  and  later  in  win- 
ter. At  Toronto  the  maxima  are  from  2  to  4  o'clock,  and  the 
minima  at  16-18  o'clock.  The  maxima  are  later  in  summer  than 
in  winter ;  the  minima  are  as  at  Hobarton,  being  later  in  winter 
than  in  summer.  The  mean  temperature  is  lower  at  Toronto 
than  at  Hobarton,  being  as  44°*48  and  53°*48:  the  range  of  varia- 
tion is  also  greater,  being  at  Toronto  43°  and  for  Hobarton 
only  18°. 

3034.  It  is  probable  that  effects  of  retardation  and  accelera- 
tion, in  respect  of  the  passage  of  the  local  part  of  the  warm  re- 
gion for  a  given  place,  may  occur  in  many  parts  of  the  globe, 
and  these  will  require  to  be  ascertained  for  every  locality  and 
for  the  different  seasons  there.  A  place  having  the  reverse 
position  of  Toronto  would  have  a  reversed  or  retarded  effect;  and 
hence  it  might  happen  that  needles  in  the  same  latitude  might 
be  affected  at  very  different  local  times,  and  yet  all  be  regularly 
aflFected  every  twenty-four  hours.  The  region  would  in  that 
time  make  its  diurnal  revolution,  but  vary  in  the  velocity  of  its 
different  parts  at  different  periods  of  its  journey,  and  that  in  a 
different  degree  and  order  for  different  latitudes,  and  for  different 
parts  of  the  same  parallel  of  latitude.  Even  the  time  during 
which  the  effect  (as  for  instance  the  sun-swing)  continued  would 
probably  be  altered ;  one  place  holding  the  influence  longer  and 
another  dismissing  it  sooner,  analogous  to  two  conditions  of 
stable  and  unstable  equilibrium. 


302 


Atmospheric  magnetism.    [Series  XXVII. 


3035.  Cape  of  Good  Hope  ^ — This  station  is  in  longitude 
18°  33'  east  and  latitude  33°  56'  south.  The  mean  declination  is 
29°  west  and  the  dip  53°  15'  south.  The  amount  of  dip,  com- 
bined with  the  position  of  the  place,  gives  a  magnetic  equator, 
which  passes  nearly  through  the  astronomical  poles,  and  so  the 
sun's  path  in  every  part  of  the  year  intersects  it  almost  at  right 
angles  and  at  the  same  hour,  namely,  about  20'  past  7  o'clock  in 
the  morning  and  evening,  or  at  19^  20'  and  7^  20'.  But  because 
of  the  great  declination,  the  sun  is  in  the  astronomical  meridian 
two  hours  before  he  arrives  at  the  magnetic  meridian  in  Cape 
winter,  and  half  an  hour  or  more  before  in  Cape  summer. 

3036.  The  sun  passes  obliquely  through  both  the  chief  qua- 
drants and  across  their  central  parts  pretty  equably ;  but  be- 
cause of  the  western  character  of  the  mean  declination  he  is 
much  nearer  the  Cape  when  in  the  eastern  than  when  in  the 
western  quadrant  for  all  the  months,  and  so  the  coming  up 
effect,  i.  e.  the  westening  before  the  midday  swing  commences, 
oiight  to  be  more  powerful  than  the  eastening  after  it  is  over,  and 
such  is  the  case.  This  is  in  beautiful  and  striking  contrast  to 
Greenwich,  which,  having  the  same  kind  of  mean  declination 
and  nearly  in  the  same  degree,  is  on  the  north  of  the  sun's  path, 
and  therefore  the  luminary  passes  its  magnetic  meridian  before 
12  o'clock,  and  for  a  time  still  approaches  the  station:  the  re- 
sult is  the  reverse  effect  to  what  we  have  at  the  Cape ;  for  the 
eastening  effect  at  the  end  of  the  midday  swing  is  more  powerful 
than  the  westening  effect  before  it,  as  is  well  seen  by  the  curves 
given  in  Plate  II. 

3037.  Selecting  .July  as  the  month  in  which  the  effect  of 
winter  occurs  at  the  Cape,  we  find  that  the  day-swing  is  very 
feeble,  as  it  ought  to  be,  the  sun  being  in  the  northern  tropic 
and  far  away ;  and  the  swing  east  is  at  an  end  by  three  o'clock 
when  the  sun  has  passed  by  about  one  hour  over  the  magnetic 
meridian.  The  upper  or  north  end  of  the  needle  then  westens 
for  two  hours,  following  the  sun  until  5^^  when  the  luminary  is 
low  to  the  Cape  and  at  its  setting.  After  that  the  needle  end 
eastens  slowly  until  10^,  then  a  little  more  quickly  until  mid- 
night (passing  the  mean  position  at  11*^);  quicker  still  until 

or  l7^  and  still  more  quickly  until  19^,  when  it  has  attained  its 
maximum  east  position.    This  effect  I  believe  to  be  due  to  the 
1  See  Tables,  pp.  317,  318,  and  curves  of  variation,  Plate  II. 


Nov.  1850.] 


Cape  of  Good  Hope. 


303 


cold,  which  in  these  hours  is  approaching  from  the  east,  and 
setting  by  its  paramagnetic  action  (3003.)  the  needle  end  east- 
ward. On  the  surface  of  the  earth  the  maximum  cold  in  this 
month  is  at  17^  or  18^,  and  as  far  as  it  goes  this  result  accords 
with  the  effect  above  described.  At  ly"^,  the  sun  in  rising  not 
only  stops  the  eastening  but  quickly  drives  the  needle  back  again, 
and  the  latter  very  rapidly  goes  westward  until  about  23^,  at 
which  time  the  sun-swing  from  west  to  east  comes  on,  being  over 
by  2^  or  3^,  completing  the  daily  variation,  after  which  the 
needle  goes  west,  following  the  sun  as  before.  In  this  sun-swing 
is  seen  the  effect  of  an  inclined  magnetic  meridian  (3000.) ;  for 
though  the  sun  is,  at  the  beginning,  only  an  hour  east  of  the 
astronomical  meridian,  he  is  full  three  hours  to  the  east  of  the 
magnetic  meridian.  As  the  swing  occupies  about  four  hours, 
the  warm  region  is  probably  near  the  magnetic  meridian  about 
half-past  12  or  1  o'clock. 

3038.  January  presents  a  case  of  Cape  summer.  The  day- 
swing  is  then  from  21^  to  or  2\  After  '1^  the  needle  upper 
end  follows  the  sun  westward  until  6^  and  then  moves  a  little 
eastwards  for  two  hours ;  after  this  it  moves  slowly  westward 
again,  the  whole  effect  being  as  if  a  cold  region  had  occurred  on 
the  east,  had  passed  over  and  gone  away  west,  and  the  tempe- 
ratm-e  below  at  this  time  is  within  2°  of  the  minimum.  This 
night  effect  of  drawing  the  needle  westward  (3004.)  proceeds 
slowly  until  15'^  or  16\  being  assisted  by  the  rising  temperature 
on  the  east  urging  the  end  still  more  rapidly  west  until  20^ 
when  having  reached  its  maximum  in  that  direction,  it  at  21^ 
turns  back  and  is  driven  to  extreme  east  in  the  sun-swing, 
through  an  amount  of  variation  more  than  twice  as  great  as  that 
produced  in  July  or  Cape  winter. 

3039.  I  think  the  above  is  a  true  explanation  of  the  reverse 
motion  of  the  needle  in  the  montiis  of  July  and  January,  or 
Cape  winter  and  summer.  In  winter  the  paramagnetic  effect 
of  cold  air  is  on  between  and  19^  remaining  longer  on  the 
east  side  of  the  magnetic  meridian ;  as  it  passes  forward,  both  it 
and  the  sun  region  conspire  at  to  carry  the  needle  westward, 
for  though  they  have  opposite  actions  they  are  then  also  on 
opposite  sides  of  the  magnetic  meridian  (3005.).  In  the  summer 
the  cold  region  has  much  less  power,  occurs  earlier  \  soon  passes 

'  The  minimum  temperature  below  is  three  hours  earlier. 


304 


Atmospheric  magnetism.    [Series  XXVII. 


over,  for  the  summer  sun  is  behind  it,  and  then  rather  aids  the 
sun  in  carrying  the  needle  westward. 

3040.  Some  of  the  other  months  are  still  more  striking  in 
summer  effect.  February  has  a  swing  through  8'  from  west  to 
east  between  21^  and  1^ ;  then  from  l'^  to  3*^  it  scarcely  changes ; 

.from  3^  to  6^  it  follows  the  sun  west;  from  6^  to  16^  it  varies 
but  little,  showing  the  merest  trace  of  east  effect  about  ; 
and  after  16^^  it  passes  west  more  and  more  rapidly,  so  that 
by  21^  it  is  at  a  maximum  west,  ready  to  swing  back  as  the 
sun  region  passes  over.  The  other  and  intermediate  months 
are  easily  traced,  and  found  to  be  beautifully  consistent  with  the 
same  principles  of  the  hypothesis.  As  is  evident,  in  almost 
every  case  each  month  partakes  of  the  character  of  the  preceding 
month  in  some  degree,  though  not  so  much  in  this  case  of  the 
Cape  as  in  some  others  (3053).  The  curves  of  December  and 
January  are  more  equal. 

3041.  The  time  of  the  sun-swing  illustrates  exceedingly  well 
the  effect  of  the  inclined  magnetic  meridian  (3000.).  In  No- 
vember, December  and  January,  the  SAving  is  from  20^  to 
between  1^  and  2^^.  In  these  months  the  sun  crosses  the  astro- 
nomical meridian  about  half  an  hour  before  he  arrives  at  the 
magnetic  meridian.  In  October,  February  and  March,  the 
swing  is  later,  being  from  21^  to  2^  or  3^1,  for  the  sun  then  passes 
the  magnetic  meridian  an  hour  or  more  later  than  the  astrono- 
mical or  time  meridian.  In  September,  April  and  May,  the 
swing  is  still  later,  being  from  22^  to  2^  or  3^^,  and  the  sun  is 
still  longer  than  before  in  reaching  the  magnetic  meridian.  In 
June,  July  and  August,  the  swing  is  latest,  being  from  23^  to  3^ 
and  the  sun  is  proportionately  late  in  arriving  at  the  magnetic 
meridian.  What  I  describe  as  the  passage  of  the  sun  is  of  course 
true  of  the  warm  region  which  precedes  it ;  but  I  prefer  referring 
to  the  visible  type  rather  than  to  the  invisible  reality,  because  it 
ties  the  considerations  of  time  more  simply  together. 

3042.  The  inclination  at  the  Cape  varies  singularly  in  the 
twenty-four  hours,  depending,  I  think,  upon  its  mean  degree. 
It  is  such  that  the  warm  and  cold  resultants  of  action  for  the 
Cape  will  sometimes  be  above  the  line  of  the  dip  and  sometimes 
below  it,  not  only  for  different  times  of  the  year,  but  I  think  in 
some  seasons,  even  at  different  times  of  the  day.  It  would  re- 
Quire  much  attention  to  unravel  the  whole  effect.    In  June, 


Nov.  1850.]      Cape  of  Good  Hope — St.  Helena.  305 

July  and  August,  when  the  sun  and  its  warm  region  are  greatly 
to  the  north  of  the  Cape,  it  appears  that  the  dip  is  increased  as 
the  region  passes,  which  would  give  a  rotation  of  the  upper  end 
of  the  needle  like  that  at  Hobarton  (2909.) ;  but  in  November, 
December,  January,  February,  March  and  April,  the  dip 
diminishes  at  that  time,  and  the  resulting  rotation  of  the  pole  is 
of  the  contrary  kind,  or  like  that  at  St.  Helena  (3057.)  and 
Singapore  (3061.  3067.). 

3043.  The  daily  variations  of  intensity  at  the  Cape  are 
remarkable.  In  the  months  October  to  April  it  is  at  a  chief 
maximum  at  19^  or  20^;  by  noon  it  is  reduced  to  a  minimum  as 
the  sun  passes  over ;  gradually  rises  to  a  second  maximum  about 
4^  or  5^,  and  then,  after  sinking  a  little  about  8^  or  9^,  reaches 
the  chief  maximum  about  18^  or  19^  next  morning.  In  the 
months  from  May  to  September  the  chief  maximum  is  at  21'^ 
or  22^,  which  is  followed  by  a  minimum  at  1^  or  2^,  due  to  the 
day  effect.  Then  comes  on  the  5^  maximum,  and  after  thirteen 
hours  or  more  the  second  minimum  as  low  almost  as  the  former, 
and  only  three  hours  before  the  chief  maximum ;  so  that  this 
maximum  is  placed  between  minima  close  on  each  side  of  it. 

3044.  Th'cse  are  exactly  the  months  during  which  the  upper 
end  of  the  needle  moves  eastward  in  early  morning  up  to  19^, 
and  that  is  just  the  hour  when  the  minimum  intensity  occurs. 
From  18^  or  19'^  to  21^  the  intensity  rises  to  a  maximum,  pre- 
cisely as  the  lines  of  force  are  moving  westward  before  the  sun 
region,  prior  to  their  quick  return  east ;  and  as  they  return  in 
their  quick  journey  so  the  intensity  falls  to  a  minimum  again, 
and  is  at  that  minimum  at  l^^  or  2^,  just  as  the  swing  is  over. 
Here  is  a  very  close  connexion,  and  it  is  curious  to  see  the 
needle  end  at  east  with  minimum  power  at  18^,  and  again  also 
at  l\  remembering  that  in  that  time  it  has  swung  from  east  to 
west  and  back  to  east  again. 

3045.  St.  Helena  ^— This  is  a  station  which  Colonel  Sabine 
has  distinguished  as  of  the  highest  interest ;  being  near  the  line 
of  least  force,  within  the  tropics,  and  with  little  magnetic  incli- 
nation ^  It  was  here  also  that  he  called  attention  to  the  striking 
fact,  that  the  course  of  the  needle  is  in  some  months  in  one 
direction,  and  in  other  months  in  the  contrary  for  the  same  hours 

'  See  Tables,  pp.  319,  320,  and  curves  of  variation,  Plate  II. 
^  Magnetical  Observations,  St.  Helena,  1840  to  1843. 
VOL.  HI.  Y 


306  Atmospheric  magnetism.        [Series  XXVII. 

of  the  day'.  De  la  Rive  attempted  to  explain  this  fact 2,  but 
Sabine  has  stated  that  this  explanation  is  not  satisfactory^. 

3046.  St.  Helena  being  a  small  island  in  the  south  Atlantic 
ocean  is  removed  about  1200  miles  from  the  nearest  land. 
The  longitude  is  5°  40'  west,  the  latitude  15°  56'  south;  the 
mean  dechnation  23°  30'  west,  and  the  mean  dip  22°  south. 
Hence  there  are  three  quadrants  concerned  in  the  day  action  of 
the  sun,  especially  when  that  luminary  is  south  of  the  equator. 
The  sun  is  south  of  St.  Helena  itself  in  the  months  of  November, 
December,  January  and  February,  or  for  nearly  that  time ;  it  is 
north  of  the  island  for  the  rest  of  the  year.  At  one  time  the 
sun  passes  the  astronomical  meridian  before  it  arrives  at  the 
magnetic  meridian,  and  at  another  time  the  contrary  is  the  case. 
In  addition  to  these  peculiar  circumstances,  St.  Helena  is  a  place 
of  great  local  differences,  and  also  its  dip  is  so  low  that  the  sun's 
day  effect  is  almost  constantly  to  depress  and  lessen  it. 

3047.  In  June  and  July  the  sun  rises  to  St.  Helena  in  the 
south-east  quadrant;  about  an  hour  after,  it  passes  into  the 
north-east  quadrant,  and  crosses  it  towards  the  southern  end, 
being  then  at  mid-distance  in  the  quadrant  about  one-third  of 
the  length,  or  nearly  60°  from  the  southern  termination.  It 
leaves  this  quadrant  about  1^  20°^,  crossing  the  magnetic  meri- 
dian at  that  time  (and  consequently  so  long  after  passing  the 
astronomical  meridian),  and  entering  the  third  or  north-west  qua- 
drant traverses  it  obliquely  towards  its  northern  extremity.  In 
our  winter,  December  and  January,  the  sun  also  rises  to  St.  Helena 
in  the  south-east  quadrant,  as  before ;  but  it  now  remains  in  it 
until  22^,  being  for  much  of  the  time  in  strong  places  of  action ; 
it  enters  the  north-east  quadrant  to  the  south  of  St.  Helena,  and 
does  not  remain  in  it  two  hours,  being  then  only  in  the  weakest 
part  of  it ;  it  leaves  it  again  before  arriving  at  the  astronomical 
meridian,  then  enters  the  north-west  quadrant,  gliding  along 
near  to  its  southern  side,  and  is  within  two-thirds  of  an  hour  of 
leaving  it  when  it  sets  to  St.  Helena. 

3048.  As  June  presents  the  aspect  of  circumstances  ap- 
proaching nearest  to  that  of  a  station  further  south,  as  Hobarton 
or  the  Cape,  so  I  will  consider  the  variations  for  it  first.  The 

'  Philosophical  Transactions,  1847,  p.  51. 

2  Annales  de  Chimie  ct  de  Physique,  March  1849,  tome  xxv.  p.  310. 

3  Proceedings  of  the  Royal  Society.  May  JO,  1849,  p.  821. 


Nov.  1850.] 


St.  Helena. 


307 


north  or  upper  end  of  the  needle  is  then  nearly  at  its  mean 
place  at  midnight  or  12'* :  it  advances  east  (slowly  at  first)  until 
16^,  and  then  more  and  more  rapidly  up  to  19'*,  when  it  stops 
and  goes  as  quickly  west  until  about  22^,  after  which  it  changes 
but  little  until  3'»,  when  it  moves  west  till  5^,  and  then  slowly 
east  up  to  12^*,  and  then  onwards  to  16"*  and  19\  as  already 
said.  The  eastening  from  midnight  and  before,  I  refer  to  the 
paramagnetic  action  of  the  cold,  which  comes  up  from  the  east 
as  before  (3003.  3025.  303 70  ;  the  rapid  increase  of  the  eastening 
from  16**  to  19^  is  consistent  with  the  increasing  cold  of  the  early 
morning,  and  also  with  the  circumstance,  that  the  sun  and  its 
representative  region  are  then  passing  from  the  south-east  into 
the  north-east  quadrant,  and  must  be  not  far  from  the  neutral 
line,  for  that  is  the  time  of  quickest  transit  of  the  needle.  As 
the  sun  advances  into  the  north-east  quadrant,  it  first  stops  the 
eastening,  as  at  19^*,  and  then  converts  it  into  westening  (3014.), 
which  goes  on  consistently  with  all  former  observations  until 
22^* ;  the  needle  is  then  retained  a  little  west  of  its  mean  position 
until  1^*,  at  which  time  it  has  not  yet  attained  coincidence  with 
the  magnetic  meridian,  and  after  this  hour  it  is  determined  east 
a  little  until  3^.  This  effect,  from  22^  to  3^*,  I  consider  as  the 
sun-swing  to  the  east;  and  I  think,  examining  the  globe  (2996.), 
its  small  amount  in  declination  is  quite  consistent  with  the  rela- 
tive positions  of  St.  Helena  and  the  warm  region,  combined 
with  those  of  the  active  and  neutral  parts  of  the  quadrants  tra- 
versed during  the  time.  From  to  5**  the  needle  end  moves 
westward,  following  the  sun ;  and  that  effect  harmonizes  with 
the  idea  that  the  previous  holding  of  the  needle  in  an  eastern 
position,  from  221*  to  3^  is  the  sun  effect:  then  the  slow 
eastening  from  'j^  to  midnight  and  beyond,  is  the  cold  effect 
coming  on. 

3049.  Colonel  Sabine  has  shown  that  the  months  of  May, 
J une,  J uly  and  August,  may  be  classed  together,  so  that  I  will 
not  speak  of  each.  Whilst  they  show  the  analogies  they  have 
between  themselves,  they  also  indicate  the  transitions  to  and 
from  the  other  months.  Let  us  consider  September.  From  7'*, 
through  midnight  on  to  16^  the  needle  stands  nearly  at  the 
mean.  From  16^  to  IS\  the  upper  or  north  end  eastens  through 
the  effect  of  the  early  morning  cold.  That  the  eastening  should 
be  fully  effected  an  hour  sooner  than  before  (3048.)  is  quite  con- 

X  2 


308 


Atmospheric  magnetism.       [Series  XXVIT. 


sistent  with  the  principlesj  for  the  path  of  the  sun  and  its  dia- 
magnetic  region  is  far  nearer  to  the  station  than  before,  being 
now  about  the  equator.  From  18^  to  22^  it  sends  the  end  west- 
ward in  conformity  with  all  former  observations,  and  then  comes 
on  the  sun-swing  from  west  to  east,  between  22*^  and  24^,  and 
a  hold  at  extreme  east  an  hour  longer.  The  shortness  in  time 
of  this  transit  is,  I  think,  a  beautiful  point.  The  sun  is  still 
north  of  St.  Helena,  but  is  now  so  much  nearer  that  he  passes 
through  the  same  angle  east  and  west,  in  respect  to  the  place  of 
observation,  in  less  than  half  the  time  of  the  former  sun  effect 
in  June  (3041.).  After  this  the  needle  end  travels  west  from 
1^  to  6^,  following  the  sun  as  on  other  occasions ;  and  then  from 
6^  to  9^  it  moves  a  little  east  by  the  evening  cold  in  the  east, 
and  remains  near  the  mean  position  until  the  greater  cold  before 
sunrise  (3005.  3011.)  takes  it  more  east  between  and  IB'^  of 
the  coming  day. 

3050.  In  looking  at  the  curves  of  variation  (Plate  II.),  it  ^^^ll 
be  seen  that  the  curve  for  the  next  month,  October,  is  remarkable 
for  being  like  in  general  character  with,  and  yet  far  removed  in 
place  from,  that  of  September ;  and  this  effect  appears  due  to  the 
circumstance  that  the  sun  has  now  arrived  at  the  latitude  of 
St.  Helena,  or  nearly  so.  According  to  my  supposition,  there 
has  been  a  feeble  night  effect  (3010.);  and  at  midnight  the 
needle  is  at  the  mean  position  and  moving  slowly  westward, 
when  the  greater  cold  which  precedes  the  sunrise  coming  into 
action  on  the  east,  counterbalances  and  arrests  the  western  pro- 
gress, and  even  draws  the  needle,  as  before,  east  a  little  for  a 
couple  of  hours,  till  18^.  Even  the  sun  region  is  at  16^  in  that 
quadrant  (the  south-east  one),  that  if  it  could  act  on  the  needle 
it  would  combine  with  the  cold  in  the  next  or  north-east  quadrant 
in  setting  it  eastward.  By  18^  both  the  preceding  cold  region 
and  the  following  sun  region  are  so  far  advanced  in  their  re- 
spective quadrants  that  they  combine  to  carry  the  needle  end 
west  as  before,  until  20^  and  then  comes  on  the  swing  from 
west  to  east  until  24^.  Why  this  begins  sooner,  lasts  longer, 
and  is  above  four  times  the  extent  of  the  September  swing, 
appears  to  be  that  the  sun  region  comes  up  upon  the  latitude  of 
St.  Helena,  and  so  acts  in  respect  of  the  magnetic  meridian 
more  powerfully,  and  also  sooner  and  longer :  also  that  because 
of  the  mean  declination  west  it  arrives  at  eqviidistant  points 


Nov.  1850.]        St.  Helena— cumulative  effects.  309 

from  and  passes  over  the  magnetic  meridian  sooner ;  and  also 
from  the  effect  of  an  accumulative  action  added  to  it  from  former 
months  (3053.). 

3051.  At  1  o'clock  the  needle  begins  to  turn  from  extreme 
east,  i.  e.  sooner  than  in  the  former  months,  because  the  mag- 
netic meridian  is  sooner  passed,  and  follows  the  sun  until  4\ 
when  it  stops,  and  then  the  evening  or  night  action  due  to  cold 
appearing  in  the  east,  carries  the  needle  back  eastward  till  10^, 
and  then  as  it  advances  in  the  quadrant  lets  the  needle  return 
back  again  (3004.)  until  between  12^1  and  13^,  when  the  latter  is 
in  its  mean  position.  The  cold  region  then  appears  to  draw  it 
westward  until  16^^,  when  its  distance  increasing,  it  releases  the 
needle  and  lets  it  return  east  until  18  o'clock,  when  the  latter  is 
still  west  of  its  normal  position,  and  then  the  sun  region  rising 
up,  helped  perhaps  by  the  cold  that  immediately  precedes  it, 
which  is  probably  now  over  or  beyond  the  magnetic  meridian, 
sets  it  toward  the  west  prior  to  the  sun-swing. 

3052.  In  December  and  January  the  sun  is  south  of  the  station. 
This  makes  no  difference  in  the  general  character  of  the  curve 
for  these  months;  nor  should  it  according  to  the  hypothesis,  ex- 
cept in  this  point,  that  though  the  sun  is  very  near  to  St.  He- 
lena and  has  the  cumulative  eflfects  of  the  preceding  months 
(3050.  3053.)  added  to  its  own  effect  at  the  time,  still  it  is  in 
weaker  parts  of  the  quadrant,  and  whilst  in  the  chief  segment  is 
almost  up  in  the  coi'ner  and  near  the  place  where  the  two  neu- 
tral planes  cross  each  other ;  hence  its  effect  ought  to  be  less, 
and  so  it  is ;  for  the  sun-swing  of  November  and  February  is 
larger  than  that  of  December  and  January.  The  sun-swing 
happens  in  December  at  the  same  time  as  for  October,  though 
in  the  latter  month  it  crosses  the  magnetic  meridian  after,  and 
in  the  present  before  midday :  still  there  is  only  half  an  hour's 
difference  from  one  to  the  other,  and  the  observations  are  per- 
haps not  close  enough  to  allow  one  to  separate  its  peculiar  effect 
out  of  an  interval  of  four  hours.  Besides,  accumulative  causes 
may  interfere.  The  places  of  the  December  curve  are  altogether 
a  little  more  west  than  those  for  October. 

3053.  The  cumulative  effect  of  preceding  months  is  very  im- 
portant and  well-shown  at  St.  Helena  (3050.).  Thus,  taking  the 
September  curve  and  comparing  it  with  that  for  October  or  the 
following  month,  we  have  a  great  difference  of  a  certain  kind ; 


310  Atmospheric  magnetism.       [Series  XXVII. 

then  again  comparing  September  with  the  month  in  which  the 
sun  is  returning  from  the  southern  tropic  instead  of  proceedmg  to 
it  and  has  arrived  at  the  same  position  as  it  had  m  October, 
another  striking  difference  appears.   March  is  the  nearest  month 
for  the  second  comparison.    Up  to  20^^  its  curve  changes  hke 
the  October  curve,  but  the  upper  end  of  the  needle  is  all  the 
time  about  half  a  minute  east  of  its  place  in  October     At  20 
the  needle  in  October  begins  to  swing  from  west,  and  reaches 
extreme  east  at  24^^ :  in  March  it  westens  until  21^  then  returns 
and  reaches  extreme  east  at        so  that  the  swing  is  an  hour 
later,  and  during  that  time  the  end  is  from  half  a  minute  (of  space) 
to  a  minute  more  west  than  in  October.  This  difference  I  beheve 
to  be  due  to  the  cumulative  effect  of  the  months  between  October 
and  March,  during  which  time  the  heat  has  been  diminishmg  m 
the  northern  hemisphere,  and  increasing  in  the  south^  Similar 
results  in  other  months  make  it  probable  that  the  effect  of  the 
atmosphere,  though  induced  by  the  sun,  lags  behind  the  lumi- 
nary considered  as  in  his  astronomical  position  all  the  year  round; 
and  that  therefore  in  advancing  to  and  receding  from  a  tropic 
he  seems  to  do  less  in  the  first  instance  and  more  m  the  second 
than  is  due  to  his  place  for  the  time. 

3054  But  where  circumstances  are  apparently  equal,  a  ditter- 
ence  also  arises.    Thus  from  March  to  April  in  one  direction 
and  from  September  to  October  in  the  o^^er,  migh  be  expec  ed 
to  be  ahke,  except  for  a  little  of  the  lagging  effect  (3053  ),  wh  ch 
would  appear  on  both  sides :  nevertheless  March  and  Apnl  aie 
Tn  Sabin  Js  curves  between  September  and  October^  and  near  to- 
gether, whilst  the  other  two  are  far  apart.    This  effect  I  refer  to 
the  different  conditions  of  the  two  hemispheres  as  regards  heat 
(Dove).    From  September  to  October  the  sun  is  pa-ng 
Lmisphere  having  a  mean  ten;P;~ 
tVnt  of  the  other  hemisphere  for  its  wintei  ,  out 
April  t  is  departing  from  a  hemisphere  having  a  mean  summer 
feCratnre  of  only  10-7  above  that  of  the  ofter  hemisphere 
temperatu  ,  respective  differences  must 

rnd  oTpa  ati-September  and  October  and  bring  together 
March  and^pril,  as  is  seen  to  be  the  case  by  the  curve  charts, 

^^tml  1  need  not  go  further  into  the  declination  variation  of 
St  Mena   the  line!  for  the  other  months  are  subject  to  the 


Nov.  1850.]  St.  Helena— dip,  311 

observations  already  made.  Colonel  Sabine's  important  query 
of  the  cause  of  difference  in  direction  for  different  months  (3045.), 
appears  to  me  at  present  to  be  answered  for  this  station,  as  well 
as  for  the  other  stations,  in  very  various  latitudes  where  it  makes 
its  appearance  (3016.  3022.  3039.). 

3056.  The  dip  at  St.  Helena  is  a  daily  variation  very  simple 
in  character,  being  a  maximum  at  7^  and  a  minimum  at  221^  and 
23^,  with  only  one  progression.  It  proceeds  to  its  minimum 
therefore  in  the  middle  of  the  sun-swing,  i.  e.  the  upper  end  of 
the  needle  proceeds  to  west,  and  descends  from  161^  to  19^  or  20^ 
during  which  time  therefore  the  dip  is  decreasing ;  then  it  re- 
turns east  until  it  reaches  the  neutral  position,  the  dip  decreasing 
the  while  still  more.  The  needle  still  continues  to  go  east  to 
complete  the  sun-swing,  but  now  the  dip  increases;  at  24^  or  1^ 
the  needle  returns  (in  declination)  after  the  sun  westward,  but 
still  with  increasing  dip ;  at  5^^  or  6^  the  westening  has  almost 
ceased,  and  an  hour  after  the  dip  is  at  its  maximum. 

3057.  So  as  the  sun  and  its  region  pass  over  they  diminish 
the  dip  by  depressing  the  upper  ends  of  the  lines  of  force,  and 
as  they  pass  away  the  lines  rise  (2926.  2937.)  and  the  dip  in- 
creases. The  eUipse  or  curve,  therefore,  which  represents  the 
motion  of  the  upper  end  of  the  needle  at  St  Helena,  as  the  sun 
comes  up  from  the  east,  is  above  westward  and  downwardj  and 
back  below  to  east;  then  rising  to  be  repeated  in  the  next 
twenty-four  hours.  This  is  the  reverse  direction  to  the  repre- 
sentative ellipse  for  Hobarton,  having  like  south  dip  in  a  greater 
degree.  But  that  is  in  perfect  consistency  with  the  hypothesis; 
for  as  the  region  is  located  above  in  the  air,  it  is  above  the  angle 
which  the  dip  makes  with  the  horizon  at  St.  Helena,  and  thei'e- 
fore  ought  to  depress  the  line  of  force  and  lessen  the  dip.  At 
Hobarton,  the  region  being  in  the  tropical  parts,  is  within  the 
angle  formed  by  the  hne  of  dip  with  the  horizon,  and  therefore 
deflects  the  Unes  of  force  upwards  and  increases  the  dip,  and  so 
the  portions  of  ellipse  at  the  two  places,  which  correspond  in 
time  and  direction  as  to  declination,  have  contrary  variations  of 
inclination. 

3058.  SingaporeK — This  is  a  very  interesting  station:  being 

1  Sec  Tables,  pp.  321,  322,  and  the  curves  of  variation,  Plate  II.  The  data 
for  Singapore  are  deduced  from  the  recent  very  valuable  labours  of  Captain 
Elliot. 


312  Atmospheric  magnetism.       [Series  XXVIl. 

in  longitude  103°  53'  E.,  it  has  only  1°  16'  N.  latitude,  and  so  is 
close  to  the  equator.  Its  declination  too  is  only  1°  40'  E.,  and 
its  inclination  12°  S.  It  is  also  near  the  line  of  weakest  force 
round  the  earth.  The  magnetic  equator  of  the  needle  is  almost 
parallel  to  the  earth's  equator,  and  the  quadrants  (2929.)  are  dis- 
tributed with  great  simplicity,  the  magnetic  and  astronomical 
meridian  nearly  coinciding.  In  our  summer  the  sun  passes 
through  the  east  and  west  northern  quadrants  during  the  day- 
time ;°in  our  winter  through  the  east  and  west  southern  qua- 
drants ;  and  in  certain  months  through  all  four  quadrants,  follow- 
ing nearly  the  neutral  line  of  the  magnetic  equator. 

3059.  Hence  if  the  line  of  force  were  free,  i.  e.  if  it  had  no 
hold  in  the  earth  (29]  9.),  we  should  expect  from  the  hypothesis 
little  or  no  change  In  the  needle,  especially  in  the  months  when 
the  sun  was  over  the  magnetic  equator;  but  because  there  is  dip, 
and  the  lines  of  force  which  govern  the  needle  are  to  the  south 
tied  up  in  the  earth  (2929.),  whilst  they  are  free  to  move  m  the 
air  and  space  toward  the  north,  so  there  is  variation  both  oi 
the  declination  and  inchnation  in  a  perfectly.consistent  manner; 
and  keeping  this  in  mind,  I  think  we  shall  have  no  difficulty  in 
tracing  the  monthly  results  according  to  the  hypothesis. 

3060.  In  the  first  place,  the  curves  of  day  variation  are  so  like 
those  of  St.  Helena,  month  for  month,  that  the  account  given  ot 
them  there  will  suffice  for  the  present  occasion  (3048.).  The 
sun-swino-  occurs  at  the  same  period,  and  the  effect,  dependent, 
as  I  suppose,  on  the  character  of  the  two  hemispheres,  is  pro- 
duced (3054.  2949.).  There  are  however  striking  differences  in 
the  latter  part  of  the  sun  turn,  and  also  in  the  night  hours,  fi-om 
5t  to  14^  The  amount  of  variation  appears  small;  but  this  is 
chiefly  due  to  the  circumstance  that  the  horizontal  plane  on 

-  which  we  read  it,  almost  coincides  with  the  free  needle,  and  so 
the  correction  before  referred  to  (3009.  note)  necessary  to  give 
the  true  value  of  the  variation  is  here  very  small. 

3061.  Considering  June  first,  as  at  St.  Helena,  the  upper 
needle  end  moves  east  as  before  until  19^  under  the  influence  of 
the  morning  cold,  after  which  it  stops  and  is  sun-driven  west 
until  2'?^  when  it  swings  downwards  and  beneath  to  east  by  3'»; 
then  follows  the  sun  west  until  7^ ;  it  then  stops  and  returns, 
creeping  more  and  more  east  because  of  the  coming  cold  (3065.). 
In  July  the  needle  eastens  a  little  more  before  19^  westens  until 


Nov.  1850.] 


Singapore. 


313 


23^,  and  then  eastens  until  4''.  The  sun-swing  is  thus  thrown 
an  hour  later  than  in  June,  which  I  beheve  to  be  connected  with 
the  accumulation  of  heat  over  the  land  (3054.),  combined  Mdth 
the  iao-o-in":  effect  of  the  sun  (3053.).  In  August  the  needle  end 
eastens  until  19*^;  more  than  in  July,  and  most  of  all  the  months: 
it  then  westens  strongly  before  the  sun  until  23^,  after  which 
the  sun-swing  comes  on  and  continues  until  5^,  as  if  the  warm 
region  were  behind  the  sun,  perhaps  even  2^.  The  time  of  the 
swing  is  much  prolonged,  and  not  unnaturally,  as  the  place  is 
at  the  equator  and  therefore  under  the  sun.  In  September  the 
eastening  is  less,  the  westening  is  less,  and  the  sun-swing  is  less. 
April  is  like  September,  except  that  the  latter  shows  the  effect 
of  the  previously  warmed  hemisphere  (3053.). 

3062.  Then  there  are  four  months  in  the  year,  November,  De- 
cember, January  and  February,  when  the  sun  is  south  of  Sin- 
gapore, and  altogether  during  the  day  in  the  southern  quadrants 
(3058.).  As  the  sun  comes  on  from  16^  or  17^,  the  upper  part 
of  the  line  of  force  moves  westward  (the  lower  being  fixed  in  the 
earth)  until  19  or  20  o'clock.  The  sun  is  at  this  time  in  the 
south-east  quadrant,  and  it  might  be  expected  perhaps  that 
the  motion  of  the  north  or  upper  end  of  the  needle  should  be  to 
the  east  if  there  were  any  change  at  all.  But  there  are  two  or 
three  reasons,  from  the  hypothesis,  why  this  should  not  be.  For 
that  effect  there  should  first  of  all  be  no  dip;  and  in  the  next  place, 
if  there  were  no  dip,  the  sun  is  so  nearly  in  the  neutral  line  of 
the  magnetic  equator,  that  the  deflection,  if  any,  would  have  been 
very  small.  On  the  other  hand,  the  lines  of  force  have  dip  to 
the  south,  and  being  therefore  held  in  the  earth,  that  travelHng 
of  the  sun  along  the  neutral  line,  which  in  its  coming  up  would 
have  sent  the  whole  Hne  of  force  west,  and  so  caused  no  variation 
of  declination,  can  now  only  send  the  northern  parts,  as  they  rise 
out  of  the  earth  and  are  carried  on  with  the  general  system  of 
lines,  west,  and  so  cause  that  western  travelling  of  the  needle 
which  does  occur.  Besides  this,  though  the  sun  be  south  of  that 
neutral  line  and  also  of  Singapore,  there  is  reason  to  suppose 
that  the  middle  or  resultant  of  the  warm  region  is  north  even  of 
both  (3063.),  which  would  aid  the  westening  of  the  needle  just 
described. 

3063.  For  if  we  recall  to  mind  Dove's  results,  they  show  that 
the  northern  hemisphere,  as  a  whole,  is  warmer  than  the  south- 
ern (2949.).   Again,  if  we  look  at  the  meridian  of  Singapore,  we 


314  Atmospheric  magnetism.       [Series  XXVII. 

shall  find  that  there  is  far  more  continent  on  the  north  of  it, 
to  produce  a  higher  temperature,  than  to  the  south ;  and  even 
by  the  local  tables  of  temperature  below,  we  shall  find  that  May, 
June,  July  and  August  are  the  hottest  months  for  Singapore,  and 
November,  December,  January  and  February  the  coldest ;  all 
tending  to  make  us  suppose  that  the  warm  region  of  the  atmo- 
sphere is  relatively  north  of  the  sun's  place,  and  perhaps  even 

of  Singapore  (3067.)' 

3064.  At  20^  the  sun-swing  from  west  to  east  comes  on,  and 
continues  until  2^  after  which  the  needle  moves  west,  following 
the  sun,  until  10^  or  11^  when  it  is  near  the  mean;  it  still  goes 
on  westening  very  slowly  until  l7^  when  the  morning  sun  ac- 
tion takes  it  up  and  drives  it  more  quickly  west,  until  about  20% 
when  the  sun-swing  east  occurs.  The  curve  in  these  months  is 
very  simple  in  its  character ;  the  night  or  cold  effect  appears  to 
be  but  small,  being  indicated  rather  by  a  hesitation  than  by  a 
distinct  movement  east. 

3065.  The  easterly  movement  of  the  needle  end  in  May,  June, 
July  and  August,  and  the  westerly  movement  in  November, 
December,  January  and  February,  for  the  same  hours,  up  to  19 
o'clock,  are  in  striking  contrast;  and  I  have  attributed  the  differ- 
ence to  the  eff"ect  of  a  cold  region  coming  on  from  the  east 
during  the  former  months  (3061.),  which  is  absent  in  the  latter 
months.    In  reference  to  this  point,  we  have  again  to  consider 
that  the  warm  region  is  on  the  north  of  the  equator  (3063.),  and 
that  as  the  sun  moves  north  and  south  it  also  will  move  with  it, 
but  stiU  keeping  north  of  it.  Hence  the  two  cold  regions,  which 
come  up  to  the  meridian  in  higher  latitudes  (3006.)  before  the 
sun,  will  not  be  in  the  same  relation  to  Singapore,  for  the  one  on 
the  south  will  be  nearer  to  it  than  the  one  on  the  north,  or  at  all 
events  more  powerful.    So  when  the  sun  is  near  and  at  the 
southern  tropic,  the  warm  region  probably  passes  over  Singapore, 
at  which  time,  therefore,  whilst  it  is  the  nearest,  the  most  power- 
ful and  most  direct  in  position,  the  cold  regions  will  he  least  m 
force  at  the  station,  and  also  least  favourably  disposed  by  posi- 
tion    But  when  the  sun  is  at  the  northern  tropic,  then  the 
power  of  the  warm  region  is  diminished,  both  by  distance  and 
direction,  and  the  southern  cold  region  grows  up  mto  importance 
by  increased  strength  and  closer  vicinity,  and  so  produces  the 

eastening  before  19^. 

3066.  A  striking  difference  in  the  direction  of  the  night  curves. 


Nov.  1850.]      Singapore — inclination — total  force.  315 

from  5^  to  14^,  at  St.  Helena  and  Singapore  may  be  observed. 
At  the  former  place  the  needle  end  tends  first  east  and  then 
west,  whilst  at  the  latter  it  moves  first  west  and  then  east.  The 
difference  is,  I  believe,  due  to  the  appearance  of  night  cold  ac- 
tion at  St.  Helena  to  a  greater  extent  than  at  Singapore.  Sin- 
gapore shows  that  action  in  June,  July  and  August,  as  just  de- 
scribed (3065,),  but  only  in  a  weak  degree  and  at  a  late  hour. 
At  St.  Helena,  which  is  in  latitude  16°  S.,  the  cold  effect  should, 
for  the  reasons  given  above  (3065.),  appear  in  more  power,  and 
hence  the  eastening  at  6^  and  after;  and  that  this  is  the  cause  is 
indicated  also  in  a  degree  by  the  tables  of  temperature;  for 
whilst  at  Singapore  the  difference  between  the  maximum  and 
minimum  in  the  twenty-four  hours  is  only  from  3°  to  4°,  at  St. 
Helena  it  is  from  4°-5  to  7°j  and  four-fifths  or  even  five-sixths 
of  this  depression  occurs  by  9  o'clock:  so  that  four  or  five  hours 
before  that,  there  was  in  the  east  a  cold  region  coming  up  and 
producing  the  eastening  effect  recorded  in  the  curves. 

3067-  The  inclination  variation  at  Singapore  is  beautifully 
simple,  and  such  as  might  be  expected  from  the  hypothesis;  the 
sun  or  warm  region,  when  passing  the  meridian,  always  being 
over  the  lines  to  depress  them.  It  is  alike  in  all  the  months, 
being  greatest  at  night-time  and  least  at  mid-day ;  it  is  nearly 
the  same  from  8^  to  18^;  then  as  the  sun  comes  up  it  decreases 
quickly  until  23^  or  24^,  after  which,  as  the  sun  passes  away,  it 
increases  nearly  as  quickly  until  7^  or  8\  The  amount  of  varia- 
tion is  greatest  when  the  sun  is  over  or  to  the  south  of  Singa- 
pore. It  is  least  in  June  and  July,  when  he  is  near  the  north- 
ern tropic.  In  December  and  January,  when  he  is  near  the 
southern  tropic,  it  is  considerably  more  than  in  June  and  July, 
which  again  seems  to  show  that  the  warm  region  is  chiefly  north 
of  the  sun  (3063.). 

3068.  The  total  force  variation  is  simple,  being  a  maximum 
from  9^  12\  and  a  minimum  at  22^  or  23^,  near  noon.  The 
greatest  variation  is  in  April  and  October,  or  at  the  equinoxes, 
and  the  least  in  December  and  June,  when  the  sun  is  at  the  tro- 
pics. The  force  is  the  least  towards  noon,  when  I  suppose  that 
the  air  above  is  in  the  worst  condition  of  conduction,  and  would 
cause  a  magnet  in  it  to  show  more  power.  But  how  that  may 
afiect  the  curves  beneath  on  the  surface  of  the  earth,  where  they 
are  compressed  together,  is  doubtful,  and  the  whole  matter  of 


316 


Atmospheric  magnetism.        [Series  XXVII. 


intensity  is  too  uncertain  and  has  too  many  bearings  for  me 
to  consider  it  usefully  here. 

3069.  I  hope  soon  to  give  further  experimental  data  for  the 
purpose  of  illustrating  and  testing  the  view  of  the  physical 
cause  of  the  magnetic  variations  which  I  have  put  forth,  namely, 
those  I  expect  to  obtain  by  the  differential  balance,  and  others 
concerning  the  sensible  influence  of  oxygen  in  causing,  under 
different  conditions,  deflection  of  the  lines  of  magnetic  force. 

Royal  Institution, 
November  16,  1850. 


r-t 

O 
GO 

.2  ^ 


00 


in 
O 

o 


MJ  6D 


O  c3 
CM  J) 


C3 

a 


3 

.1-1  J3  ^ 


c3 


Q 


in  rd 


«3 

to 

o 

GO 
CO 

(U 


c3  ^ 
(U  O 


o 


C3 


<U  0) 


CO 

o 

CO 


1) 
> 
o 

a 


3 


c3 


o 
c 

C    C  03 

0  ;^  ^ 

1  Q  a 
s  «  ^ 

O 
O 

o 


m 
d 

o 


Daily 
means. 

oo  ro^o  O       oo  «  M  irt  onoo  H 
^  c<>  Vi-  ^       H  M  M       Vi  CO  ^  m 

^' 

CO 
IN 

cn\0  t4-vo  p»  O  r»  O  OOO  oo  v£) 
On  0\  -3-  O            p  O  ."^  .'^  *^ 

^  c»  V»     b  b  b  b  b  b  Vo  m  co 

X* 

(N 
CM 

CO  CO        CO  p  p       5^  P  5^  P 

-  w  b     b  b  b  b  b  b  ^  d  c» 

^' 

C<I 

coo  O  O'^ooo  cot^oo  p 

^  b  b  b  b  b  b         b  b  o  b 

a' 

o- 

(N 

i^vo  Ti-ci  MOO  Ti-«ocoT:J-o  tJ- 
corl  O  mcocor-^'O  -^j-i  o  0 

-  b  *>-<         Vi  d  V>  CO  Vi  0  o  b 

^' 

OS 
rH 

tovo   N   On  w    w  vO  oo   O    t-^OO  On 
M   cocl        OncI  u-^onm   co«o  CO 
""M  cococorococo^r}-M  0  O 

j:' 

00 
1— 1 

i-i  O  ^      O  Onoo  ^  cooo  rl 
O  OnOnihoo  voO  cocoi>.o  ^ 
'd       '-ti-  '-^  Vo  d  CO      'tJ-  d  V»  w 

a' 
1— 1 

ON  r»         oo    M    C0\0    O    W  CO 

"sO  d  cococodvovo  ro-^  -<:i-vo 

Vl                 '<:}-  CO  'cl    "d    CO  CO  CO  CO 

to 

r— 1 

Onoo  rl  t^'^dvo  ^  ^  CO  ^oo 
O  coiy-iJH            ^'^d'O  i-i  CO 

CO  »o  »o  V}-  CO  ci  d  CO  CO  CO  Vi"  CO 

'lO 
r—f 

6»   O   '^J-r^O  ^oc^   c5  O\0n»j^^ 
COLOU-iO          M    COCOM  t~^ioi>. 

'-coioio^cort  c1  cococoV^-co 

vo  »o  o>'»0  t-^'^cotHVOvCi  rj-t^ 
u-»  U-)       Onoo  O  ri  O  O  Onoo  O 
-covo^ococ^  cococo^-<4- 

CO 
f— I 

Oncoc^oo   coO    cJ         »J^»J-l  COVO 

to  onOO  o  d  On  O  CO 

^  CO  lO  U-)  CO  Cl           C^    C^    CO  Vj-  'rj- 

>=  j=* 

oooo  -"^I-cotJ-tJ-coc^mvo  -^J-d 
On       co.u-ivo   t-^  0        On  i-i  coO 

-COU-ilOCOCl    M    c4    Cl  T^U-i^i- 

rH 

COOnOnO  w  co-^-^  tJ-vo  !>. 

M  V£J                 rJ-VD    t-^«0  OO    •-"  COVO 
"  ^        iJ-i  CO  c1   "-i   w    N   Cl   rJ-  "t^J- 

ja' 
O 
1— I 

-"^OO   w   u-N  Onvo    On  M  OO  t^vO 

t-^  d  *o  -t^-           -^oo  M  covo 
'-■^loiocod       M  cl  d  "sj-^  Vi- 

x' 

vo   d   On»J^O   '<:J-i-ivovo  I^OnO 
cooo  co-^cococoiot-^Ht  covo 

"^i-ij-^ii-iVod  M  M  c«i  (<i  ^in^ 

ob 

CO  O  d        CO  ^  Onvo  >^  On  d  ^ 
':i-ON'^'^cod  >-i  ^t-^O  coir-i 
■'^  vo  lo  CO  d  't-t  w        d  "^i-  ^ 

?• 

vo  cocoonm  ONON-<i-co  vovo  d 
MOO  cococoM  o  cor-sO  d 

vo  Vo  CO  cl  "-f  M  "d  *d  Vo 

to 

vo  "ii-d  d  c~-»Mvo           -"^oo  -'li- 

CNt-^CO-^M   M   o   dvooo   O  d 
""coiotocori  M  M  covo'^ 

to 

On  M  oo    CO  vo  vovO    d          ONOO  m 
dMT:j-voMOOd  vovo   On  -^J- 
^  -^hvo  vo  CO  *d  M  M  '(^        CO  V  V- 

tJ-vo  t^voovo  rJ-co^ONcot^ 
f   P   r   f^^«"'^^ONONd  -"ri---^ 

"■^r^vo  coci  >-«  M       d  -^J-VoVh 

CO 

-?i*'»o  CO  M  d       On  CO  o.  cooo  oo 
p  oo   On  d  5>'00   O   d   d   d   On  O 
"vot^vo  T^-d  "-t  d  cocovovovo 

ja' 
CM 

O       ONVO  M  r^vo  0  d  vo  vo  M 
d   d       oo  oo   On  vo  d   ON  CO  vo 
vooo  r-.      d  M  M  d  CO  Vovo  Vo 

1— 1 

cooo       O  On  r^oo  ci  ■'d-  ^-^  vooo 
jsr          p       d  <-<  vovo  oo  m  ^ 
"*vor>.vo  vod  M  M  M       vovo  vo 

O  j=' 

*-t  M  ^ir^co^O  rloo  0  ONrJ- 

p  ^      vo  vo  on  m  vo 

^     vo  vo  V  M  b  b  b        Vo  *^ 

a 

!= 

cr. 
(D 

J    =  :  i  i  ;  :  1  :  s  S3 
^-^xi  Ss-g-S 

5-5  5  3-^  3  3  5  S- «  o  0) 
i-j(iti<;<l^i-ji-,-5;a)055P 

U9 

a 

a 
c 

w 
o 


CO  j3 
rH  o 

c  - 

1-S  -1 

o  o 
^  so 

f-H  ^ 

CO  3 

a^ 

o 

•\ 

C3 

rd 


o 


o 

a 

o 


o 
a 

£3 


CI 

o 

•  I— ( 

•S 

•  l-H 

G 

•  ^ 

a 

rH 

o 


I— I  o 

o 

c 
o 


a 


CS 


On      ro  moo  i^oo  oo  oo  Ht  00 


O  O  O  O  O 


O 


CNVO  M  CO  rnvo  O  c<  to  O  O 
_r)  vp  "i-  CO  M  rJ-  u-i  CO  1-1  o  O  O 

b  b  b  b  b  b  b  b  b  b  b  b 


*^  too  rl^0»0  -^J-co  covo  vo 
^  ^  O  p^y>  rovo  ^  O  to  O  O 

b  «  w  b  b  b  b  b  b  b  b  b 


pi  00  vo 

ON  p  vo 

b  M  w 


COVO  oo  HI  CO  vo  t^vo  vo 
vovo    CO  vo  CO  CO  M 

M  b  b  b  b  b  b  b  b 


t^VO    M  oo   CO  f^OO   to        -vi-VO  oc 

_av_c»oo  _-5l-voo  iH  M  o  o  ■+■4- 
b  'm  m  w  b  b  b  b  b  w  b  b 


Ov  0\  O  vo  o  o 
Cv  O>vo   i-t   w   o  O 

o  i-i  w  *M  b  b  b  b 


0\V0 


O    W    0\  C)  M 

p  CO  o  vo  oo 

b  M  b  b 


w  o  Ovooo  t^.oo  r~.o  vo 
y^_>-icoco_c^  c)  w  ooo  O 

'n'MbbbbbwoM 


O  O  O  Doooo  ooo  cot^-^o 
5^  r^*P  vo        O  CTv 

M  *M  M  M  b  b  b  b  b  M  b  w 


oo  covodvo  cot-^cot-i  cst^o 
^vo  ;^c^  t-^t-^vovo  voooo  vo 

M  M  M  *M  b  b  b  b  b  M  b 


PlVOVO    t-^OVI-l    l~^COM    o  t^O 

cl  y^;^poooooooooo  woo  vo 

M  M  H  w  b  b  b  b  b  M  b  m 


O  vo  vooo  CO  On  t-^  Ti-vo  O  O 
tO>JD   CO  _M   _OVOO   t^OO   vo  M   On  ^ 

M  M  w  M  b  b  b  b  b  M  b  w 


q    COVO  oo    OVVO    vo  CO  vi-OO 

."=r'0       w  00  _o>  On  O  0\  61  on  -J- 

M  M  M  H  b  b  b  M  b  M  b 


O  On  vovo  ^  C-vVO  M  oo  On  O 
CO  ."^      p  p  w  On  c4  On  vo 

M   M   M  in   M  in   w   M  b  i-i  b 


"^ONVoo   c)   M   o  t^OOO 
."^  5>      vp    CO  c^    c^   CO  c<   vo  o  vo 

IH     1-1     M    in     M     M     H     M    M     M  M 


O  ■<d-oo  OnOncovoo  O  voo 
y~i  On  Ovoo  CO  _m  ^  ^  t1-vo  r» 

1-1     C)     i-l     !H     W     M     M     W     M     M  M 


i-i    ONMVO    OvO    COCl  VOVOCOM 

p  p  p  vo  vo  cooo 

l-lrlrtdMI-lMlHMMMM 


vo  ^VO 
I-i  1-1 

1-1    'pl  c< 


1-1  ON  ^vo  vo  vooo  oo  ^ 
w       CO      vo     oo  -4-  o 


1  IH  M 

i  W     Cl  N 


>-<  C^  O  O  OO  Onvo 
CO  c^  p)  vo  vo  oo  tJ- 


p 


VO  l-<    /JNVO    t--VO  OO    ■>i-00  OO    M  oo 

.    P  P       r'  5>  1-1  to      On  r-. 

l-lPlplpll-iblHlHl-IWMl-l 


VO 


On 

b 
p» 


On 
O 


On 


ON 
VO 


On 
vo 


O  M  vo  Onvo   On  t-^       vooo  co  to 

P  CNOO  oo  1-1  t^oo  C^VO  OnVOVO 
M   1-1   M   M   M  b  b   M  in  in   w  M 


c^  vo  vovo  oo  •!^  r^vo  o  vo  pi  o 

r~        p  ^    w      s  ^ 

O     M     W     M     M    b    b    'iH    'm    *M     M  m 


JO  '^'^  ^  t1-  C?N  OM^  ^  pj 
vo  p   p   vooo   t^vp    ON  O    1-1  vo  S 

o  M  "w  M  b  b  b  b  it  M  b  W 


i  VO  o  oo  Onvo  vo  to  ovt^ 

5^        ^  p         vo  vo  t-^VO   vo  PI  00 

b  b  b  'iH  b  b  b  b  b  b  b  b 


ooo 
p  p  p 

b  b  b 


Onoo  co  t1-oo  cooo  o  O 
CO  vovp   CO  PI   O   O  pr 

o  b  b  b  b  b  b  b  b 


CO  CO  11   o  O 

P     IH    _M     O  O 

b  o  b  b  b  o  b  b  b  b  b  b 


M   pl   pi   o   O   tj-  CO 

■<i-VO     W     O     O     IH  M 


1^2 
5  o-v2 


;  a    a  n 

tu      ?  -2  o  S  S 

5  3  oj  "  °  <" 

-» i-j  o  ;g  Q 


vo 

ON 

b 

M 
VO 

b 

vo 
Pi 

b 

M 

b 


00 
l-t 


o 


CO 
I— I 

a 

o 
a 

o 


in 


CO 

G 


O 

H 

a 

-  2 


O  6C 

a.s  § 

^      t/J  fH 

,d  03  o 

' 

if  o  ^ 

a 

C3 


O 


i=i 
o 


•  I-H 


bfl.a 

G  09 

c3 


f*^  O  o 


a! 


p- 

o 

m 

O 

o 

o 

O 

O) 
&. 

a 


XI 

CO 
CO 
(U 
»-l 
Ph 

m 

a 

p 

CD 


1 " 

eo 

OO  m  o      u-)\o       On  O 

^VO  VO^ONlHMfllHU-lTl-m 

goooooooooooo 

M 

NO 

*ovO  iH  M  o            ^  m  ^-o  O 

goooooooooooo 

o 

(M 
CM 

N  NO  ^      i-n      -^vo  w->  pi  ►H 

goooooooooooo 

o 

ja* 
1— 1 
CM 

VO   u-iT^-rocoM  COM   c^O  -^M 

OOi-iOOOOOOOOOO 

O 

NO 

o 

c» 

0 

j:* 

O 
CM 

OO  P~.OnNvo   O  t~--5i-w   tJ-  rl  >-D 
t^rl  I-*  O  »-nmcl       looo  oo  vo 
OOMiHwOOOOOOOO 
p 

ja' 
I-H 

On  *o  m  mvo        *o  onOO  oo  O  no 

t-~MOOOMOOOlHOOONt~^ 

OOwwOOOOOOOOO 
p 

00 

NO 

o 

o 

J3* 

CO 

f-H 

iHc<»Hu->cn^OO*ocnOTj- 

ONOO  NOIHOOOOt^ONt-~. 

OOOOOOOOOOOOO 
O 

A 

«>. 

r-l 

w  o  OO  O  OO  OO  l>-  OnOO  0  ^  O 
vooonovoihoOOOvo  t^NO 
OOOOOOOOOOOOO 
O 

CO 

o 

^' 

to 

f-H 

cIC^OoihonOooco  On  NO 

t-^NO  NOMiHOwiHiONrNTj- 
OOOOOOOOOOOOO 
O 

o 
^ 
o 

Si 

iO 
rH 

Onooo  mONt^ONro  ThNO  r-  ri 

lO  C^NO  "OMOOiHwu-tio-*^ 
OOOOOOOOOOOOO 
p 

o 
^ 

o 

Onoo  no  O  O  Cnoo       O  no  no  oo 
t^NO  NOrJOO>Hc^Nouncn 
OOOOOOOOOOOOO 
p 

o 
o 

ja" 

CO 

I— 1 

l-O OO    On  O         t^NO   *o  C*NNO 

«4-  t^NO  u-idOOiH'H^N^ro 
OOOOOOOOOOOOO 
O 

00 
CO 

0 

-ci-  O  O  N  O  C^NO  On  m  o  no 
tJ*       t^NO  HtHO»HiHU-ivnro 
OOOOOOOOOOOOO 
O 

OO 
CO 

o 

ja' 
1— 1 
i—i 

M  NO  O  ^H  o  t-^NO  On  t*^  IH 
C^NO  NOc1ihOih'H'^->4-c^ 

OOOOOOOOOOOOO 

O 

NO 
CO 

O 

a' 

o 

I-H 

O   "H  t^CTNiH   C^O   C^rot^  -^oo 

tJ-  t^NO  NOrllHIHMM^'^Cl 

OOOOOOOOOOOOO 
O 

NO 
CO 

O 

OO  ON      ON  m  tJ-  cono  c»  -^no 

tONO  NONOC^IHIHMMrl-Ti-M 

OOOOOOOOOOOOO 
O 

NO 
CO 

O 

NO 
CO 

o 

~o 

0 

00 

NO  00  ^  O  NO  t   OO  On  m  NO  cn 
rONO  NONOc4»hmmmt1-'^c1 
OOOOOOOOOOOOO 
O 

ON  On  looo  m  CO  -^J-  »^  0 
CO  r^NO  NOclrlc^N'H'^-^m 

OOOOOOOOOOOOO 

O 

ja' 

<x> 

ja' 
lO 

OO  NO   "^OO   NONO  NO   On  m   tooo  ^* 

tJ-     r^vo  ton  m  p<  mno^co 
OOOOOOOOOOOOO 
O 

o 

NO 

o 

CO  ON  tH  OO  O  ro  Nooo  '4"  t  NO 
rj-oo  t^t^comcnmcJNO  loci-i 
OOOOOOOOOOOOO 

O 

x:' 

M  onO  Ono  ONdoo  mO  Onc*^ 

OOOOOOOOOOOOO 
O 

NO 

o 
d 

CO 

O 

CO 

M   t-^  N  OO   On  nonO   O   no  t-^OO  On 

CO^NONOM     M     M     M     IH  NOCOf^ 

OOOOOOOOOOOOO 
O 

J=* 
CM 

OO  O  t-^Ooo  cnNot^ioroM  to 
MMpj'J-OOOOOrorJM 
OOOOOOOOOOOOO 
O 

►H 

o 

F-H 

CO  O                 O    O    ^  CO  O    ON  NO  CO 

OOOi-iOOOMOOOO 
OOOOOOOOOOOOO 

o 

o 
o 

O  O 

Z 

O  O  O  O  cooo  ONOO       O  O  O 
OOOOOOONOOOO 
OOOOOOOOOOOOO 

o 

NO 

o 
o 

Mean  time 

H»|i.,«5-<i«^i-5'-»-<(/30i^H 

cn 
B 
<s) 

IS 

o 

09 

rli 


<A 


> 

•  1—1 

09 

a 

•  rH 

CO 

OO 

I-H 

o 

Hi 

o 

•*-> 
rH 

CO 


a, 

a 

o 


rCj 
O 

u 

■1-3 

U. 
d) 

Dh 

a 

c 


OO     >HNO     C»     "H     iJ-M     COt^t^VO  NO 

JO  On  t^NO  NO  l-i  ^NO  l-^  On  .4-  CO 
a      K  lo  d  K  *•+  Vj-  Vl-NO  ON  d  NO 

NO  NO  NO  NO    NO  NO  NO  NO  NO  lONO  NO 

"0 ' 


ON  O 
NO  IH 


NOONdoo  o  tJ-tI-o  d 
ro_d  ^d  coOnO  notJ- 
O  d    CO  in         in    1^  00  00   "0   NO  t-^  b 
t^NO  NO    NO  NO  NONO  NO  NO 


NO  d  00   ■nJ-OO   d    rj-  r< 

o  r>-  tJ-  >H      ^  ON  NoNo 


NO  d  O  NO0Nt^t^NOT}-t-^0  d 
•■4-NO    NOOnO    ihOO    O    OnO  NONO 

OH   H   OnNoOnOno   r^'oN  Vj-\JD  On 

t^t^NONONO     NONONO  NONO  NO  NO 

NO  t~^~d 
t--  _d 

o  o  On      t1-oo      Vi-  looo  d  Nooo 

t^NO  NO  NO     NO  NO  NO  NO  NONO  NO  VO 

oO'^l-ONddOt-^ONOONor^ 

On  COOO   ^dNO    H    OnO  Onh 

000       NO  H  NO  d  *d  coMD  H  CO 

NO  NO  NO  NO     NO  NO  NO  NO  NOVO  NO  VO 


^  CO  CO  On  tJ-  cooo  00   -^OO   O  O 
_d   CO  O   "J-  .'l-OO  00  00   On  O  NOOO 
°  r--NO  CO  On      "o  O  H  Vt-  On  Vl  NO 

NO  NO  NO     NO  NO  NO  NO  NO  NO  NOVO  NO 


ONO  H  t-^'d-O  H  NOCOTj-NOH 
d^COHOOONOHMHNO^ 

o  NO  Vi-  H  00  V}-  b  b  H  CO       o  CO 

NO  NO  NO     NO  NO  NO  NO  NO  NO  NONO  NO 


00  d  r^oo  d  NO  CO  On  O  co 
H  ^  5?N  _d  CO  Onoo  h  d  no 

OcOCoboO  Vi-b  b  *H  CONO 
NONONO  NONONONONONONO 


NO  H  NO 
00     -n}-  H 

°  d  CO  H 

NO  NO  NO 


O  ON 
•Nj-  NO 

do  t1- 

NO  NO 


H  NO  ^ 

d    ON  NO 

H     O  H 

NO  NO  NO 


O  ^ 
H  VO 

CO  NO 
NO  NO 


NO  O 
p  VO 

O  CO  CO  H 
NO  NO  NO 


O  H 
00  00 

00  V}- 

NO  NO 


CO  On 

NO  H  00 


NO  NO  NO 


H  00 

cooo 

CO  NO 
NO  NO 


t}-  CO 
H  00 

00  b 

NONO 
00  H 

■4-  _On 
r-  On 

NO_NO 

~On 

NO  H 


O 

NONO 


dOONONOONdt^'^HOO' 

copvo  O  ONO  ^Ovo  H  o  rt- 
ocotJ-h   onnom  Hd  covo  00  b 

NO  NO  NO     NO  NO  NO  NO  NO  NO  NO  NONO 


tJ-  covo  h  no 
NO  d  O  d  d  00 


d  H  NO  CO  CO  d 
CO  On  CO  ^00 
oco-vi-dONNoHH  c^  covo  00  b 

NO  NO  VO     NO  NO  NO  NO  NO  NO  NO  NOVO 


Tl-  t~~.   CO  t^NO  00     H  NO     O     d  00 

t^NocoNocoH  o  t^co  r^oo  H 


o  CO  d 

NO  NO  NO 


CO  NO  r^oo 

ONOO  00  tl- 


On  NO  d  d  d  t1-vo  00  h 

NO  NO  NO  NO  NO  NO  NO  NONO 

ON 
NO 


o  rj-  tJ-  d 

NO  NO  VO 


On  no 

NO  NO 


d  c-^  H  t-^  •.4-  d 

CO  CO  C7N  H 

d   d  d  Vl-vb  Onh 

NO  NO  NO  NO  NO  NONO 


H  tJ-  O  NO  NO 
NO  CO  d  ^00 


r^vo 
t^oo 


O  NO  CO  O 

NO  NO  NO  NO 


t-^oo  •rl-  d  t-^ 

H     NO  H     NO  O 

d  "d  CO  Vj-       On  d 

NO  NO  NO  NO  NO  NOVO 


H  NO  Onoo  On 
O  f^NO  On  CO 

o  NO  NO  CO  b  NO 

NO  NO  NO  NO  NO 


NO  O 
d  CONO 


d  H  On  ^ 
d   NO  onno 


CO  CO  CO  NO       O^  d 

NO  NO  NO  NO  NO  NONO 


NO  COOO  *^  H 
^  H     CO  NOOO 

O  NONO  -^J-  H  NO 
NO  NO  NO  NO  NO 


H    CO  H    c)    NOOO  On 

r^oo  Onno  o  CO  h 

CO  CO  CO  NOOO  O  CO 
NO  NO  NO  NO  NONO  NO 


H     ONOO     CO  H 

M  VO  On  H  tJ- 
ovo  vb  Vh  d  ' 

NO  NO  NO  NO 


NO 


NO  t--  NO  onoo  d  "d- 

_d  CO  p  NO     H  _CN 

Vl-  V4-  Vi-vi>  00  H  cr 
NO  NO  NO  NO  NONO  NO 


•nI-  O  00  Onoo 
On  d  Onvo  O 
o  r^oo  NO  d  00 

NO  VO  NO  NO  NO 


On  NO  H  00   H  On  O 

H     O  NO  -^NO 

Vl-  NO  NOVO  On  d  NO 

NO  NO  NO  NO  NONO  NO 


O  NO  d  ONOO  CO  H  d  NO  d  CO 
cocoo  d  Onnoh  OnO  nooo  d 

NOVO  NOOO  H  Vl-00 
NO  NO  NO  NONO  NO  NO 


o  O  O  00  -"l-oo 

t-^NO  NO  NO 


d   ■^nO  vO   On  h   t-^  h   NOOO   On  co 

NO  On  NO  t1-  O     t^NO  NO     CO  H  NO 

o  H   H   ONvi)  b  "t^  On  CONO  On 

t-^NO  VO  NO    NO  NO  NO  NONO  NO  NO 


CONOONO     'l-d     H     H     t^NO  00  H 

t1-oo  •>1-0  r-rodvooovo  _Ov_d 
o  d  d  H  00  "h  00  Onoo  O  'l-NO  O 

t^NO  NO     NO  NO  NONO  NO  NQ 


CO  CO  On  O  cooo  no  t^oo  no  co 
ONO  H  ON-il-r^NO  ONO  _t1-no  00 

o  CO  CO  d  00  doo  OnOnh  Not^o 
vo  no  no  no  nono  no  no 


O 

CO  o 

O  CO  t}- 


O     ^  NO 

-1-  On  no 
*d  00  d  I 

f^NO  NO 


OnvO 
t^NO 


CO  On  H  CO  CO 
d  O  d 


»   On  On  H   nooo  h 

NO  NO  NOVO  NO  NO 


NO 


H  P 

O  CO  ^4- 


■<1-  ON  d 

CO  CO 

H  00  d 

t-^NO  NO 


NO  NONO  O  00  O 
^  H  00  NO  O 


00  Onoo  h  NOOO 

NO  NO  NONO  NO  NO 


<u 

3  3 


to 


H  '      Urn  %^ 

:  :  <u  £ 
2       e  £ 


^-  -rr:   ca  o. 


>  o 

O   O  4J 


«  a 


CO 


O 


r»i  C7\  O  00  O  r< 
w  oo  ^  i^oo  •-'  O 

■  r»  'n  V<  M  b  M  w  O 


CJ\  O  O  Ov  vr. 
"l  'fl  t< 


«  rn  lO  ^V£>  y3  O  50 
rn  Vo  V)  "n  b  b  b  b  b  Vri  Vn  m 


^      ro      O       fovo  O  00  On 
10  M  00  O  O  p  cfl  p 

-  w  M  >-i  b  b  b  b  b  b  'n  h  m 


t^p-i00r>O\i-<O\t^pl  rn"^ 
ro  O  O        CO  p  00 

■bob  b  b  '"-1  H  M  b  b  o 


O  O  O  ctnoo  o  O  O 

O  O  c^  *^  v^vo  ^  »ooo  o  O  p 
■  b  b  b  b  w  'd  'm      b  b  o  o 


ON  O  1000  w  M  CO  On  On  6> 
vo  tH  CN      ^  CO  i-t  -^OO  tJ-  d  CO 

•  b   ►H  "•-I  c^   d  CO  CO  CO  in  b  b  O 

O  r--  -"rhNO  r»       c<  On  cooo 

v/~iv£3  On^O  O  COM  ONt^co 
■  M       V>  c^  "cl  c^  c^        cJ  "m  hi  w 

00    'O  O    C^    t^NO  NO    M    Vi-1         O  CO 

NO  ri  »ONO  ^NO  On  t^oo 

McJciC^MWMwbf-IHM 


CO  CO  Onno  riOwt^Orit^co 

t^GO  NO  l-l  CO^COCI  r^t^ONON 
■  M    Vl     «    C«     M     M     M     M    b     H  W 


O  O  00  ON  >i-oo  vn  M  M 
ONr^OMc^rtHtNooociM 


CO 


p 

■  d 


(HmmmOmc^cI 


CO  c<  00  M  w 
C^     M  NO     ON  tH 


+  1-1  c^  NO  O 

d   M   O  NO  On 


rl  c< 


coci  r^N  oncJ  Tl-ri  -i-ooo  ■;^ 
■4-  cJ       On  O  _ci  m  o  ijD  O  vd  vd 

■  Vl  CO      w  m  "m  O  "c»  V)  c» 


CO  o  O  NO  c^  t^oo  r)  m  coNO  0\ 
NO  'i-oo  On  O  "  O  O       _D  ONOO 
~  c)  CO      M  M  M  M       b  Vl  V>  Vl 


ONOOO  doo  cococo 
00  vooo  00   OnO   OnO  t^-^HH 
■c^coc^mO'-iOmOc^coco 


NO  00  to  tH  00  O  ^00  On  to  M  o 
00   Tj-GO  ONOO  00  d  N 

Vl  Vo  ci  w  b  o  b  b  o  "ci  CO  CO 

O  1000  O  N  CO  ■^oo       "i-  CO  M 

On  CONO  NO   t^^  C^NO   r^NO    CO  M  t-i 

■*c^coVii-<bbbbbViVoco 


O   M   OnNO  NONONOOO   c^   ^  Onco 

00  d  NO  NO  w-1  m  .^NO  NO  M  On  On 

•  "d  CO  Vl  M  b  b  b  b  b  Vl  Vi  d 


M  d       o  00  ON  d 
■ci*  O  NO   u->       CO  c^ 
■  d  CO  d       b  b  b  b 


d  CO  t}-  t^oo 
NO      O  to 
b  d  d  d 


d  w  00  CO  NO  o  O  Nooo  o  ON  NO 
ONNO       d  d  _w  0  d  _d  00  d  "I 

-  M  d  d  i-i  b  b  b  b  b  w  d  d 

■Ni-Noowi-iOddOOdNONo 
ooNoc^odp  O^d  cooo  00 

-  M  d  d  M  b  b  b  b  b  M  M  M 


On  O    NO  CO  NO  -^OO    d    NO  CO  NONO 

O  00  w   O   NO       T^oo   CO  d  00  NO 

■  d  d  d  M  b  b  b  b  b  "  w  M 

CO  On  M  1^  -Ni-NO   Tf-NO   d  rl- 

O   CO  NO  d        ONOO  00   -"^  O  NO  On 

■  d  CO  d  M  b  b  b  b  b  d  d  "w 

H    1-1  00    NO  t^OO  00    O    NO  CO  IH  o 

tj-  M  tJ-no  vooo  -NhNO  tI-  CO  r- 
•d  -^coi-f  bb  O  ob  cocod 


"OO  ^r^^  Q  Nouidoq 


.  .  .  . 

■  CO  Vj-     Vl  b 


t-^  O  00  cooo  ^ 

b  b  b  b  '■N^  co  Vo 


d  CONO  ooi-tiHdt-tONMt^No 
j~^>ot^d  t^_f~-oo  MOO  Ti-  os'-o 

■  CO  tJ-  CO  CO  O  b  b  b  b  n:J*  CO  CO 


^  fe.  ^  t-a 


a  3  3  aj  o  O  0) 
-i  >-»  -gj  CQ  O  jg;  Q 


00 

QJ  15 

a  o 

goo 

1—1 

CO  o 

 ,  •  ^ 

9  "1^ 
,2  ^ 

*N 

G  O 

2  '-^ 

^  ;g 
o  o 

133  a 

QJ  .-. 

c  &p 

tc 
nS 
<U 

S  s=i 
^  § 


^  QJ 

.2  a 


o 


3 


>  a 


c 


M  t->  COOO  00  00  NO  d  t^^NO  00  ON 
r-^  ONOO  00  CO  to  CO  t}-  nJ-nd  CO  T^ 


OcoocoOOdO 
p  O  p  p  o  O  O  M 

b  b  b  b  b  b  b  b  b  b 


d  o  o 
o  o  M 


o 

b  b 


O  O  O  O  ON  O  OnNO  000 
p   M  p   d  p  p   O  _M   CO  p   o  O 

b  b  b  b  b  b  b  b  b  b  b  b 


CO  ^  CO  CONO  CO       rt-  O  t^^  CO  O 

NO  ON         tJ-  CO         d    VONO    CO  d  M 

b  b  b  b  b  b  b  b  b  b  b  b 


00  O  NO 
00  tJ-  p 

b     M  M 


•>j-  M  o  CO  ON  d  00 
ONOO  00  NO  r~.  onoo 


NO  O 

vo  ^ 


000000000 


d  CO  O  osoo  tJ-  M  d  NO 

cooo    NO  CO  O    ONOO    O    d    CO  ONOO 


mhmmoOmmmOO 


NO  ti-  tJ-  t-^oo 

NO    O  00  M 


d    O    CO  O    CO  NONO 

d  O  M  ■tj-NO  CO  d 


O  M  t^NO  NO  00  NO  ^  OnOO  00 
t^OOt^MCOOd    ■'^•NO  CO 


M     d    d     M     H     M  M 


M    M  H 


NO  OnOO  MND  nocow  ONOOO 
M    OnOO   d   ^  d    CO  no  r^NO 


M     d     M     M     M     M  M 


NOMdOOco^OOOO  OnNO 

OOdMOCONOCO^J-  NOOO    NO  NO 


M  d  d  d 


ON  -nJ-NO   NONO  00   d  00         ON  w  d 

On  -Nj-  d  1-i  NONO  NO  NO  ■^00 


M  d  d  d 


CONO  t^oo  On  t^oo  ONOO  tJ-  CO  o 
d  Ti-  CO  M  NO       NOVO  NO  o  00  00 


ddddMMMMMdMM 


O  M  NO  M  t-^NO  000  ONNO  M 
■*NO    ^^t^OOOOOOO    O  OnO 


ddddMdMMMd 


CO  CO  CO  ONOO  -Ni-OO  OnOO  t^^  NO 
NO    r^NO  NO    ONOnO    ONONd  O 


d  d  d  d 


d  M  M  d  d  d 


r^NO  ONt^ddMdMNOooON 

r^OO  OOONMOdMO-Nl-IHCO 


dddddddddddd 


COOO  ONOO 
00    ONOO  00 


M  d  No  On  CONO  O  NO 
d     M     CO  M     M    NO  .  CO 

d  d  d  d  d  d  d  d  d  "d  d  d 


t^^  d  OnNO  00  -rl-'  O  ON  d  no  00  M 
SOMONddd-^CO  CONO  CONO 

d  CO  d  CO  d  d  d  d  d  d  d  d 


M    NO  t^NO  NO 

On  M  ON  M  CO  d 


O     O  00  NOOO 

■4-  ^  -4-00  -ct-  t-^ 


dcodcodddddddd 


r^MQNOdMdNOONoNOON 
P  00    p     d    _d     -4-  CO  NO.  CONO 

d  CO  d  CO  d  d  d  d  d  d  *d  d 


cooo   t^^  CO  O   M   M  NO    OnNO    O  m 

NO  rj-OO  WO^OMMNOO■5^ 


dddddi-idddddd 


Onm  roo  Nod  -J-d  cooo 

CO  d    NO  ONNO  00    ON  O    CONO  O 


ddddMMMMddMd 


OnOno  -^doo  Tf-M  d  O  OnOn 

•4-  O  00    M  NO    NO  --^-NO  On  M 


M    d    M    d    M    M  M 


CO  CO  tJ-NO    -"^-NO   M    OnNO  tI-NO 

OcocoNoHOOddcot^O 


NO  M  NO  On  n^-no  O  d  O  CO 
-i-NO  y^oo       NONO  d  t-^ 

b  b  b  b  b  b  b  b  b  b  b  b 


^  CO  M    NO  O  00    O    NOOO    ^00  NO 

M  d  _M  tj-  d  _M  CO  d  M  d  O  d 

b  b  b  b  b  b  b  b  b  b  b  b 


•  >N  :  :  :  :  :  •  ^  •  'I'  5 

-1^  aj  a'a  « 


4 


Daily 
means. 

OOOOOOOOOOOOO 
p 

0 

jz' 

CO 

<N 

LA  vj  t-A     NO  "          '  "  * 

OtHMMtHMMMMMMWIH 

O 

r1 
m 

M 

^' 
IM 
OJ 

y^i.    1                        ^«     ^     »-^._            M  r-^ 

0\           )     ^        ^1       ^4       \J                           9     ^               1  1 

0'>>r<iOroi-iOOONOO 
OmO'-ii-ii-'mO'-ii-ii-imm 

O 

Q 

J=' 
1—1 

(N 

1       ft  x-N  V 

oo       O  ON  On  r^vo  vo  vo  Onoo  oo 
000"000000000 

o 

00 
0 

^' 

O 
IN 

to  'd-NO  io  rj-      CO  ro  c<)  »^  l^^O 
OOOOOOOOOOOOO 
p 

c) 

0 

r— 1 

O        O  ^  ^*       ^4"       d  NO 

OOOOOOOOOOOOO 
O 

cn 
0 

J=' 
CO 
r— 1 

rtONClNi-''-l'-iNI-'C»N 
OOOOOOOOOOOOO 

o 

0 

.c' 

J>. 

I-H 

MOrlMf-'O'-t'-'NH^'^ 
OOOOOOOOOOOOO 
O 

M 

0 

x' 

1— < 

On  cl  oo  *-0  On  ^J*                On  w 
OOOOOOOOOOOOO 

o 

0 

^' 

1— < 

*o  d  oo  vo  oo        M             O  O 
M0'-<>-''-'Ow»-<rlPl^^*^ 

OOOOOOOOOOOOO 

p 

t-t 
0 

1— 1 

M0^^*^>^000'-*'-''-'0 
OOOOOOOOOOOOO 

o 

0 

CO 

1— 1 

oo                    oo               '■O  "?J* 
OOHwOOOOi-iMMO 
OOOOOOOOOOOOO 

o 

0 
0 

I  .         ■               few    fv\  ^\ 

M           M         oo    W          c^i                 "    V'  1 

00000000i-<>-i"0 
OOOOOOOOOOOOO 

o 

NO 
0 
0 

.a* 
1—1 
1—1 

M         ^  0   O   O   O   O        *^  0^ 
OOOOOOOOOOOO 
OOOOOOOOOOOOO 

o 

0 
0 

x' 

O 
r—l 

O  r1  NO  ^*       M  c4  o  ^**^  O  O 
OOOOOOOOOOOO 
OOOOOOOOOOOOO 

o 

pi 

0 
0 

J=* 

1-1   O              ^  H   ^   O         O  O 

OOOOOOOOOOOO 

OOOOOOOOOOOOO 

o 

0 
0 

CO 

NO  r    o  'ONO  no  m 
wQwO'-'Oi-'OOOOO 
OOOOOOOOOOOOO 

o 

0 

j:" 

^ ,   Q     Q                     |_/-^  f><^           u/"^  oo  W 

OOOOOOOOOOOOO 
O 

NO 
M 

0 

CO 

On  pi       ViO  oo                   o   On  l'^ 
OOOOOOOOOOOOO 

o 

Q 
CO 

0 

OOOOOOOOOOOOO 
O 

00 

0 

oo  NO  t^NO  NONo  li-iw-iu-it^r^t^ 
OOOOOOOOOOOOO 

p 

NO 
NO 
0 

CO 

o\  i-^  onoo  oo  no           t^oo  ctnoo 
OOOOOOOOOOOOO 

o 

00 

0 
0" 

O) 

VO                                 ^*                                 M  to 

MONr)r>'-iOONOOOOO 
0>-iO'-<'-ii-''-'0>-i'-''-<>-''-' 

o 

.a' 
1—1 

CTn  C>       O   N  oo   t^vo   f   C*^  M  O 
r^O'd-Nori-Mi-ipJroD'-"'-' 

Ol-IMI-il-<M«l-lMlHMMM 

o 

1-1 

13  . 

OX 

iH  NOVO  NO  -^^i-rl  cn^i-roi-i  ih 

O 

NO 

Mean  time 

p 

«*  ^ 

>-,  fci  .a:  <E 

^1 

> 
•-3 

:  ^  :  si 
•2  V-  ^ 

3  S  0  u 
3  ST  =J  °  ^ 

t/i 
C 

«— 1 

> 

•  1-1 

03 

c 

00 


O 
-(-> 


00 


s 

o 

■  i-H 


P 

-t-" 

cd 

<u 

a 

c 

0) 


00  t^^O  Nr,t^(j^t^t-^r,,^t^ 
Onoo  rlNOOOONfOHOOi^ 
o      NOVO  in      b  t^oo  On 

NONQNOVONOVO  NnW>tn  ly-)  Lnvo 
NO  ^00  NO   r»   O   OnvO   ^  ro  »-o"c7n 

pi  J^oo  piooNo  oni-1  i^pok 

o\o  00  00  Nn  '«  Onoo  'on  b  N  'l- 
NOnonovonOnQ  ^  ^  LnvQ  vo  no 


0000  m-i-iHoo  o  w  u-ipo 

pop  ro  M  OncnO  cor^poO 
°  NO  r-^  i-~vb  Vj-  b  00  00  00  'o\'—  CO 

NO  NO  NO  NO  vo  VP   to  NO  u->  vovo  NO 


Ovp^ONONNOONNCOwOt-- 

pt^cor^pii-cOpi'-'NopiOv 
o      Novb  In  CO  b  00       t^oo  b 

NO  NO  NO  NO  NO  NO    NO  Vn  NO  LONO  NO 


ON  CO  00  o  i-i  por^o  pi  00  ^On 

_r--_Ti-ONoo-^Opi'-ico  ovvo 

o  pi  Vj-  to  Vj-  pi 

NO  NO  vo  NO  NO 


On  t^NO  NO  r^oo  o 

NO  vo  NO  NO  NO  NONO 


t}-  pi  a\  cjnno 

00  vp  pi  vo  O 
o  1-1  po      po  't-i 

vo  NO  NO  NO  NO 


pi  00  NO 
NO  PO  NO 

do  vb  NO 

NO  NO  NO 


o 


rl  0-1  ON  tJ- 
_co  -cj-  p  p 
0  w  m  ^  CO  w 

*nO  vo  vo  vo 


I  vo 
O 


'^J-  CO  CO 

00  VD  lOVO 
tr>  X-O  V-O  U-) 


CO 

p  t-- 
00  b\ 

c<-i  On 

^  CO 
Ov 

10  10 


On  ^  CO  M  ON 
CO        O  t-i 

O  M    CO  ^  Vo  1-1 

vo  vo  vo  vo  vo 


covo  O 

LO  CO  U-l 

00  "ij 

ur-,  10  u-^ 


O 

'uoO 
10  LO 


CO 

CO 

ON 
10  u-> 


ON  M    U-IVO    CNVO    CO  CO  ON         VN  tJ- 

^u-|(-tvo  »J^^iOc1  *^  u^co 
Om   co^comoovO   ^  >-oOd   r->.  On 

vo  vo  vp  vo  vo  Wj  CO  U-1  U-)  LTi 

o  On  !>.  r-N.     M  I-I  00  t>oo  n 

vo         w   t>.  d  vo  »J-iVO   CO  iH  vo  ^ 

0»-t    CO^COh-lOOVO  U~)\0  O^ 

vovovovovo  u-)io>-n  vo  "-o  vo  to 


voootHooO  rJ-Ovo        O  M 
vo  t>.  CO 00  tJ-  i>.vo       »o  CO  10 

OM  cOrJ-cOMOOVO  10  Vovo  V-.  On 
vovovovovo  tovototovovou-1 


00  vo  O  N  r^vo 
00  On  10  o  "Jooo 

0|-*    COrj-Vi-MOOVO    Vr^  LOVO    t"^  ON 

VO  VO  VO  vQ  VO  ^  to  VO  VO  ^o  to  lO 


c)  00  f^oo  O  ^ 
r-s  Onvo  On 


vo  cotoi-i  r--o       O  cItJ-oovo 

OHivO    wvoOOOi-tOOVO    O  On 

on  ^  I-"  Onvo  voO  00  On 
vo  vo  vo  vovo  totoiovotovo  vo 


w  O  "I  N 
ON       On  00   cl  M 


M  CO  Onoo 
cooo  N  00 

ON  ^  r}-  'rh  t-<  'o>vo  vb  Vovo  60  O 

vo  vo  vo  vo  vo  vo  vo  *o  to  tovo 

d  vo   O         CO~b   CO  6J  0\*-*  t>- 

r*"  r*"  P    P  r'  r  5^  P  5^  r*"  5^ 

o            10  '-^  Vl  On      O  \b  vb  00  b 

vo  vo  vo  vo  vo  vo  vo  vo  to  to  vovo 


ci  vo  vo  i-» 
vo  vo   M  vo 


CO      vo  to  M  c3  r^vo 

I-*    coci    »^rJ  MtO^ 

o  Vi  Vi- 10  Vj-  Vi  'o\  V^vjD  Co  V^oo  b 

vo  vo  vo  vo  vD  vo  to  to  »o  vo  vovo 

CO  I-*  CO  ONOO    O    ^  ^vo  O 

On  on  -^OO         tJ-  •<d-vO   covo  t>. 

o'tt  10  Vi  Os  V-*vb  Co  K  00  b 
vo  vo  vo  vo  vo  vo  to  to  to  to  tovo 

On  CO  vo  cl  00  O  covo  r->.  m  o 
co^oo   *-*   covo   t^OO  tovon 

o  CO  vo  to  vo  CO  On  'l>.  Co  Co  'cn  *»-« 
vo  vo  vo  vo  vo   vo  vo  to  to  to  vovo 


oo'  Onvo   tJ-vo  co  vooo  tJ- 

vo  tooo  oo^OM  "-(cJO  On"-" 
o  '-^VJD  vo   vo  CO  b  00  V-  r^OO   On  V» 
VO  vO  VO  vo  VO  VO   vo  to  vo  »0  vovo 


On  O  00  t-ioooo  ft  COM  rj  ci 

000    M    ONM     OnONM    OCO  covo 

Ovb  t^OO  vb  '-"^  b  00  00  00  On  M  V- 
vo  VO  VO  VO  VO  vO   vo  vo  vo  vovo  vo 


O  voo  Ovt^cot-^i-"  Mvo  cooo 
COOnm    CNmOOOO   m    t-i    -^VO  00 

O  K-00   On 'l>.  Vo  M   ON  On  Ovb  'd 
VO  vo  VD  VO  VD  vo    *^  vo  tovo  VO  VO 


OnOnm    ^-^Ov"-"    C^    r^M  N 

t^vor^vooo  covor-r^covot^ 
ot^ONONOO   vo'r)   O   OvOnm  coto 
VOVDVDvOVOvOvO    vo  tovo  VO  vO 


to  Onoo  on  co 
OvOO  00  On  o  l>* 

o  t-.  On  Onoo  ^b  V»  O 
VO  vo  VO  VO  vo  VO  vo 
10  M  r*^  On  M  \o  CO 
O  vO   looo   O  I^OO 


n  00  M  r-^ 

M    M    ON  OnOO 

O  O  •-'  CO  vo 
vo  vo  vo  VD  VO 


000         OvOO  VO   N  O 
VO  vo  VO  VO  VO  VO  VD 
00  ^  CO  -^J-vO  O 
VD       »-»  vo      T^-  CO 

o  ON  Onoo  vo  V»  O 
VO  vo  vD  vo  vo  vo  VO 


Onvo  00  00  m 
On  N   OvOO  00 

O^  C  M  CO  vo 
lovo  vO  vO  VO 

00   On  O  ON 

vo  00  vo 


On  Cn  M  CO  vo 
vo  vovo  vo  VO 


•q  I-  ^  .c 

ell  1  i 


0 


X 

o 
u 

a, 


00 


■-'  s  « 

;3  so  ^ 

O   Tj<  o 

P  CO  -►J 

t— I  ^ 

D 

^  3  fcD 
J  «  ca 


,  03 

!  j:i 

O 

-£3 


o  o 

^  a 

o 

g  § 

<u  o  o 


u 

OJ 
Oh 
O, 
=i 
Si 

o 


■Jo  Q 


0) 


O  C3 


o  Sj 


1-^  o 


o 
•  o 

-2 


^§1 

o 
I  § 

tie 

a 

•  ^ 

02 


6JD 
G 

CO 

<u 
;h 
o 
G 


0\  O  w^vO  'i-  m  H4  o 

u-i oo  ctn  rhvo  cl  m  en 


P)        O        O  ^  p  p        p  ^ 

.  M  "hi  *M  b  b  b  b  b  b  m  « 


oo  pn  "-t  N  pi  O  ^  ^  P  ^  ^  P 

b  b  b  b  b  b  b  b  b  b  b  " 


o 

CM 


05 


00 


w  O 
■+  O 

b  b 


c-^  o  oo 
o  o  vo 

b  b  b 


M       m  O  O 
PI  p 

b  b  b  b  b 


p> 

b  b 


O  O  O  T^p^p^  o\t^'^'*0  o 
O  O  O  P^  -^oo  p)       _t-^  _M  p  p 

■  b  b  b  b     b  "  1-1  b  b  b  o 


O  -^00  to  On  o  o 

O  »o      o>  p<  >o  o  O  O 

.  b  b  b  b  pi  >-<  '«  V»  "w  b  b  b 


OS  pj 
pi  oo  w 


O     H     pi     ll    l-l  p) 


PI  r^vo  oo  w 

to  OS  IH  -^vo 

W    M    o  O 


plOclPlP*^Pl^OP^ONPl^O 
O  t-^00  oo  ^oo  M       _rh  p  p  " 


Os*4-ploovooo  pi  Ovo  pl^ 

pi  oo  00  oo    p^^4?  oo    u-1  PO  pi  M 


po  o  p<  lovo  oo  i/s  O  OS  OS  OS  O 
^  Osoo  o>  povD       >o  p4  pi  PI  >J~ 

.MMOO'-'OO'-'t-tl-tlHM 


O   OOO^CsiH   Pi   P^  OsO  ^  SO 

OSOO  OS  Pi  so  oo  -"i-  PI  ^  ^ 
.MHiOO'-'OO'-''^^'^ 


r*^  O  oo  wiso  -^OO  so  pi  ^  coso 
SO  OSOO  OS  w  lovo  pn  pl       ^  vn 

-.MMOO'HOO'-'tHMM 


ro  t^oo  pl  OS  M  Ti-  Pl  SO  PO  poso 
SO  OSOO  oo  p       "^  pl  "       ri-  y~i 


O  O  p<  00  Pl  O   -^so  OS  Osvo  pr 
Osoo  so  00  pl  pn  M  o  pl  pnso 
MMOOOOO'-''-*'-'*-'tH 


o 


at 


^  O  pl  MU-it^c^pl  pl  Osso  O 
OO  OSOO  sot^OplOOPIPnt^ 

—  mmOOOOO*-''-*^*-*'-' 


^oo  fi-oo  o  O  pl  osso  so 
OS  O  oo  VOVO   O   pl   O   O   pn  VOOO 
>MplOOOOO'-*Mi-ii-t 


CD 


to 


-I* 
CO 


-If 


a  -■ 


■^00        HI  U-)  O        Osso  O  O 
p  1-1   osso  t^OplOi-iiOt^OS 

-  pl  Pl  b  b  b  b  b  i-i  >-i  M  *M 


"    OS  Pl  OO 

m  o  OO  OO 


Pl  Pl  M  o  o  o 


rj*  OS  OS  PO 

Pl  Pl  so  OO  O 
O    i-t    w    tH    M  (si 


M  ti  OS  »o  Pl  ^oo  pn  o  t^oo 
^  pnpl  OsO  »H  ^rJ-vnr^OsM 

■plPllHOt-lObl-lMWMpl 


pl    c*SVO    ^  'i-OO  tJ*SO 

pl  ^  1-1  Os  cnoo  OO  u-i 
•  Pl  H  "w  M 


O   O   O   1-1   "   w  n 


PI  OS  mso  so       pl  pn  pn 

t^so  M  pn  u-i  o  so  so  Os  ^oo 

■  pl     pl     IH    M     M     O    IH     •H     M     M     p<  pl 


piso  t^piso  Mooso  pnoo  so  0\ 
p  5^  p  w  so  oo  tnso  M  00  On 

pi    CO  M    i-C    ■«    b    b    >1    M    pl  pl 


Osmmunpl  rj-w  piso  m  onOs 
M  so  t^oo  w-jso  p  pn  pn  OS  OS 
.  Pl  m  M  b  b  b  b  w  >-i  'd  Pl 


plr^cnt-ioowMooooMp^os 
^  _os  tJ-vo  rt-  Tj-  t1-vo  00  pn  OS  OS 
■  Pl  Pl  M  b  b  b  b  b  b  pi  pi  Vi 


os  T^  1-^  o 

Pl  cn  o  pl 


N   PI   w   O   O  O 


O  oo  o  pl 
p  Pl       OS  tJ-  m 

o  b  b  i-i  Pl  pl 


OS  3 


C  .Q 
C3 


'  S 

1  H 


■  v  B 

^  o  9^ 


«  ct.-S  o  OJ 
erf  c  ia-CrE^'^Oa.-i-  t>  o 
iS  5<>2  5  ^  p  «  o  o  <u 


VOL,.  III. 


CO 
I— I 

o 

00  C/2 

GO  ^ 

CO  a 

r-(  O 

a  a 
>-»  o 

•S  s 

^  2 

o 

o 


G 


C3 
OJ 

IB  O 

OJ  G 
hC  '"^ 


G 

.2 

cS 
G 

03 

G  ° 
1-!  G 

03 

03  i-rt 

-M  EC 
p.  S-i 
^  OJ 

9  a 

G 

&C 
G 

■  rH 

CO 

cS 

03 

;h 
o 
G 


G 

03 


d  (-4  so  OS  pn  cnso  Osso  so  Pl 

OS  Pl    OS  tJ*SO    U-»  O    '^J-  Pl  b 

l-iPll-iPli-ilHI-fMclclPlPl 


PlOOOOOi'lOOOOO 

opppppooopoo 
b  b  b  b  b  b  b  b  b  b  b  b 


pl  o  MOO  mpi  r^rJ-u-iiH 
pn-rhMpi.Oplpl'-ii-irl 


OOOOOOOOOOOO 


OSM  loioosOsOspl  Os-4-  -+00 
O  Pl       1-1  -^J-so  so  so       M  o  O 


OOOOOi-ii-ii-i 


^OO  lOOO    O  so  oo    >H  HI 

OS  pnoo  M  pl  pi        pnso  h«  o  oo 


M     HI     M     d     pl  M 


Pl  OO  -"i-  pl  rv  iH  rhoo  osso  o  oo 
»ooo       Osoo       t^so  pn  OnOO  pn 


PlPlplPll-IHIHCMplplplpl 


CO  pn  vj-j  vo  w-»  pi  cl 
t-^  O       HI  cl  O  O 


mso 
Osso 


m  u-i 

Pl  M 


plpnplmc^plplHicicopnpl 


r^u-it-^M  ost~^pl  OsO  O  On 
OS  pl  d  pl  pl  Pl  p  so 
pl  Pl  CO  p*  pl  "pl  d  pl  Vn  pn  d 


Pl  pl     OS  Pl    HI  HI 

C-^  OS  pl  un  d  Pl 
d  d  d  Vn  d  d  "d 


_d  p  NO 
cl  CO  CO  d 


d  OS  d  Osso  O 
OS      d  d 


d  d  d  CO  d 


_d  d 
d  *d  d 


u-i  o 
_r-_d 
d  "po  d 


sn  OS 
osso 


H  oo  M  CO  d  >o  OSOO       d  d  d 

t^Osr^COrj-M    HI    HI    t^d  P 

d  d  d  cod  d  d  d'd  poVod 


i-ipnt^OOMOsOOspn  coso 
p  NO  -4-      _d  ^^  _d  jr^  _d  p  t-^ 
d  PO  d  PO  d  d  d  d  d  CO  pn  d 


so  oo  d  cooo 
NO  O  c 
d  '    '    '  " 


CO  d 


VOOO  so  un  poNo  so 
HI  HI  d  oo  PO  o 
cod  d  d  d  d  cocod 


so       d  OS  O 
O  d 
d  pn  d  PO  d  d  d  d 


t^oo  poso  so 
O  p  d  oo  d  O  oo 

d  CO  CO  d 


SOO-^HidOOSO»0-<;l-t-^tO 

r  d  oo  CO  o  oo 

d  cn  d  CO  d  d  d  d  PI  po  Vo  d 


HI  d  o  NO  PONO  O        d  Osoo  NO 
O       CO  >^  HI  d  d  00  d  o  oo 

d  CO  d  CO  *d  "d  d  "d  d  po  co  d 


d  -^voc^d  OnOshioo  pod  vn 
NO  psNO  d-^HiHidc^dboo 
d  d  d  CO  d  d  *d  d  pl  CO  co  d 


d  "o  o 
VOOO  vo  o 


"i-  VONO  d  Os  c^so 
CO  d  HI  coso  P  OO  so 


dddcodddddPOdd 


so 


so 


oo  so  d 
CO  vo  d 


Os  O   O   OsOO  NO  OO 
O  d  d  HI  OS  VOOO  oo  NO 


dddcodddHcdddd 


t^Hioo  MSO  Osooo  d  Osoo  so 
O  d  oo        OS  vo  t^so  CO  voso  d 


d  d  HI  d  HI  HI 


iH  d  d  d  d 


O  O  vo  t-^  . . 

OS  O  'l-NO 


d  tI-'^vomoo  d  d 

O    ^COCOM  tJ-COOs 


HIdHldHIMMHIdddHI 


00  voso  OS  t^oo  Os  M  t1-oo  so  d 
d       CO  o  M  OSOO  O  OS  CO  Osso 


MMHldHlOOl-IMdHll-l 


50  r}-vo■5^0  t-~voOsO  •<j-t^cn 
OS  d          VOOO    vo  T^-NO  so    OS  PO  HI 


OhiOwOOOO 


PO  tJ-  OS  d  d  O 
■^No  d  oo  PO  d 

b  b  b  b  b  b 


vo  -4-  O       CO  T^ 

HI     CO  O     HI  NO  vo 


O  T^so  ooO'^OdMOONOOs 

OOOdOOOHI^COHlQ 


OOOOOOOOOOOO 


QO 


Tj4 

00 


00  Ft> 


in 


05 

13 

■4-3 


O 


C      .  03 

d  .^H  Gh 

O  ^  Ph 

I  1 


a 

•13 


Jr;  M-i  oj 

^  o  o 

03  03  O 

03  g  03 

rd  O 

•S3  O  -^^ 

03  e  ° 

«->  (Tj 


CO  _Q 

-U  '~. 
O 

03 
-»-> 

O 

d 

o 
•  I— ( 

■tj 

I 


d 

03 


03 

s 

d 


a 

d 

d 

•  I-H 

d 

OQ 
03 

.s  i 

I» 

e3 

O 

03 

ncr 

the 

03 

CO 

03 

Ph 

\< 

03 

03 

d 

d 

0) 

E- 

Daily 
means. 

w        u-i  w  vo   w  t}-vo  u-1       o  o 
OOOOOOOOOOOOO 

■+ 

CO 

0 

.a' 

CO 

OOf<t^oou-iO^«^'-""^i-' 
OMcitnMO'HMiHciONON 
Omhmmmihhhmi-iOO 

H 

IH 
H 

CncocI  c>  vt-  rl  'o          r^oo  '-^ 

ONO'-«COtHOO*-'MMCTNCN 

O 

•  < 

0 
HI 
M 

M* 

1— t 

(M 

t-oo  oo  iH  ON 00  o\  as  O  O  oo  r-^ 
OOOOMOOOOi-iMOO 
O 

M 

ON 
0 

iH 
O 
IN 

>J-  CJ\  t-^vo   ro  N  O        O  O 

u-i  tJ-           t^v£>  r-~       t-^       u->  w-i 

OOOOOOOOOOOOO 

p 

m 
VO 
0 

^' 

crs 
1— ( 

CO          ro  T*-oo  ^ vo  rj- 

OOOOOOOOOOOOO 
p 

00 
CO 

0 

ja' 

CO 
1— 1 

r<  -"l-r)  O  w-iovDOO  roo  t-~0 

OOOOOOOOOOOOO 
O 

HI 
Pi 
0 

Jl' 
1^ 

i-H 

p»  M  r)  u-i  H  oo  "-10O  CO 

MMMMMOtHHtMI-IMHI 

OOOOOOOOOOOOO 

p 

■4- 

IH 

0 

«5 

O  On  w  cooo  O  NO  C7\  On  M  tJ- 
mQ'hmOO'-'mmmmm 

OOOOOOOOOOOOO 

p 

M 

0 

js' 

in 
f— 1 

r^^ONi-tNo  -tJ-tJ-woono  coco 
000*-'000»-<'-'i-twM 
OOOOOOOOOOOOO 

p 

0 
IH 

0 

.a' 

oo  u-1      ONNO  tovo  M       M  On 
OOOOOOOwmmOO 
OOOOOOOOOOOOO 

o 

00 
0 
0 

CO 
1-H 

M    1-1  00    rhNO    PH    t}-  O  oo    IH  NO  lO 
OOOOOOOwOiHOO 
OOOOOOOOOOOOO 

o 

NO 
0 
0 

£3  .a' 

■d 

r^OioO'^'HN'4-  CONO  rl  CO 
OOOOOOOOOOOO 

OOOOOOOOOOOOO 

0 

'  CO 

0 
0 

I-H 

OMc^NOOOclcOMOM 
OOOOOOOOOOOO 
OOOOOOOOOOOOO 

o 

0 

0 

ja' 

o 

O   O  O  "J^NO  O   P)   O   O   O   iH  iH 
OOOOOOOOOOOO 
OOOOOOOOOOOOO 

o 

p) 
0 
0 

CO  O  IH  covo  O  '4-  O  IH  o  O  O 
OOOOOOOOOOOO 
OOOOOOOOOOOOO 

o 

p» 

0 
0 

0 
0 

00 

On       CO       O   IH   ^NO   pi  CO  IH  0 
OOOQihOOOOOOO 
OOOOOOOOOOOOO 

o 

J=' 

OnOO        IH  hi  Tt-      u-)00       CO  tJ- 
OOOiHwOOOOOOO 
OOOOOOOOOOOOO 

o 

0 
0 

x' 

CO  CONO  ■^■^t-^O  On  CO  On  rl 
mihmihihOOihOhiOih 
OOOOOOOOOOOOO 

o 

IH 

0 

j:' 

-M 

IH  -i-  O  O  corJ  coONON■>4■'J^>H 
r»clp|p)>HTl-iHOONiHrl 

OOOOOOOOOOOOO 

O 

ON 
IH 

0 

oo   t-^NO    ON  O   HI   On  NO  OO   ON  IH  NO 

r>f»C)PlPl'H>HlHIHMHcl 

OOOOOOOOOOOOO 
O 

P< 
P> 

0 

-W 

O  r1  triONONO  coco  onnO  O  ih 
cori-cOTj-cocl  cocod  cococo 

OOOOOOOOOOOOO 

O 

CO 
CO 

0 

(M 

t^M  u-iu-iO  ihnO  vot-.0  ^  -f 
rJ-NO   N^NO  NO  voN/^NOCO^nrr^ 

OOOOOOOOOOOOO 

O 

c» 

0 

ja' 
HI' 
1—1 

NO     O     ITN^IH     O^NIH     IH  lOCOCOIH 
NO  oo  oo    OnOO    t^OQ  OO  NO    t^NO  NO 

OOOOOOOOOOOOO 

o 

"vjO 
0 

00 
On 
0 

O  x' 

2; 

NO  On      r)  -"i-NO  O  IH  CO  cl  o 
OOOnihOOOnOOOnOOOJ-^ 

OOOihihmOWIHOihOO 

O 

Mean  time 

i-n     <^  -i^  1^ 

:  :  :  it  ;  ih 
.  .    -2  I-  ^  .ci 

>-j    -si  (z)  0  Z  R 

VI 

C 
0 

<u 

o 

> 
u 

03 

m 

hQ 

O 

03 

rd 

03 

nd 

.3 

03 

<4-> 

B  GO 
o 

d  00 
S 

^H  --^ 


00 


c3 

d  ■  ' 

I— I 

03  —I 

rd 


G 

o 


09 

f-i 
cS 
03 


Qj  03 
> 

tH 

^  60 
^  d 

d 


03 

:S 

O 

03 
U 

d 

H-> 

c3 

03 
Oh 

a 

03 

d 

c3 
03 


pl  00  f~>oo  »l-NO  On  O  cooo  NO 
000   On  O  "O   IH   w   M  b  'hi  b   ON  On 

t^oo  00  00  00  00  00  00  00  1^1^ 


00  00  Ti- 

OOO     W     HI  HI 

t^oo  00  00 


I  NO  NO  NO  00  On 

;  d  ci  M  IH  b  b  O 
•  00  00  00  00  00  00  00 


ONONO  HIOOOO  ONPl  Tj-r^p)  HI 
000  ONOlHHIIHHIHllHbbb 

f^oo  00  00  00  00  00  00  00  00  00 


tJ-  -jJ-no  NO 

'  r~-  On  b  b 
t-~  r^oo  00 


OnOO  On  O  no  w^^ 


M  iH  o  O  O 
00  00  00  00  00 


On  On 


cop  ■'J-OnOnOoo  p>  co>op^ 
o  t^OO  On  On  b   hi  b   O  O  On  OnOO 
i^^  t^oo  00  00  00  oo 


CO  Pl  00  00     ;   Ti-00  00   -"J-  d  10  c» 
ONO  00  On  On  •  b  b 
t~~  :  OQ  00 


On  On  OnOO  00 
t-^  i-~ 


p  t~»t~^c<  onhioo  iO'^t-~-<i-ON 

O  t~..  t^OO  "on  On  b  b   On  OnOO  OO 

r~      t-oo  00  t~ 


JO  f»  on>o 
01b  00  Cn  On 

t-~  t~~ 


;   N  NO  00 

;  b  b  " 
00  00 


CO  vn  HI 

On  On  OnOO  00 
1^ 


^  p)    M    U-1  CO  CO  COOO    t-^  O  NO  HI 

o  t-^OO   On  On  b   O   O   On  On  "onOO  OO 

r~-  r^-  r~  t^oo  00  00  t-^ 


OnnO    CO  O 

ONO  00  b  b 
t^oo  00 


On  JH  p 

b  b  b  b 
00  00  00  00 


CO  rj- 
ONOO  00 


NO    COTj-ONNj->t~-f^HI    HI    ^  ONNO 

o  t^OO   On  On  b   O   O   O  b   OnOO  OO 
t--^oo  00  00  00  00 


b 

00 


On 


On 


00 


On 


ON 


On 


On 


CO  O  NO  CO 

o      On  b  b 
t-^00  00 


;   ^        CO  cooo 
HI    IH    o  O 

00  00  oo  00 


On  On  On 

r-- 


OnNO   On  CO  On  pi   m   ^  w-iNO  CO 
o  't-^t>0  "on  "o  "o  "hi   hi  "o  "o   On  On  On 

r^oo  0000000000  t^t^t-^ 


On 


On 


O  p< 


'I-  •ooo  00  00  NO  d 


Of^ONMO  'ihihOOOnOnOn 

t-^00  00  :oooooooor-.i^t^ 


HI     P>     M     fv,  Tj-  t1-  U-lOO    O  HI 


000  OnOOihhiihOihOOnOn 

r-~  t^oo  00000000000000  t^t^ 


OP»P)ON-NOONPiC<P»|-~'* 


000   Ohio     -  hihihiihOOnCn 

t^oo  0000  loooooooooot^r^ 


lOf^-lOOOO  t-^00  O  >O^^WNO 
000  OnOhihihiihhihiOOOn 

t^oo  0000000000000000 


rhNO  y-i  d 

OOO     O     IH  HI 

r^oo  00  00 


O    IH    CONO  NO    HI  O 

'd  'd  HI  IH  b  0  0 

00  00  00  00  00  00  00 


O  d  ON  tJ-  HI  d  _d      .t^  p*  f 
o'oNboiHdddHiHiHioO 
t^oooooooooooooo  00  00  00  00 


HI    HI    O  NO 

'  'on  d  "d  HI 

t~-oo  00  00 


t^oo  IH  _d  NO  00 

d  "d  *Hi  "d  HI  "o  0 

00  00  00  00  00  00  00 


r-dNO  ONNow-it^oo  d  t^p  _CN 
o  'on  hi  "hi  'm  "d  "d  *d   IH   d   hi   hi  o 

t^oo  00000000000000000000 


u-1  M   cooo     I  HI   HI   On  CO  ;ii-oo  _co 

OONddHI      -  COCOHip^HiOiH 

t^oo  0000  :oooooooooooooo 


O  d       HI      t^oo  On  Tj-      CO  CO 
obniHiddddHi'diHHiiH 
00  00  00000000000000000000 


ty-|NO   HI  00 


On  O  Onno  CO  O  CO 


OONIHd"       -  dCOHIdHlHIHl 

r~-oo  0000  .00000000000000 


tI-oo  vn  u-1  tJ-  r--  hi  yN  hi  p 

O  'on  b     HI     HI    "d     d     d     HI    "d     HI     IH  w 

r^oo  00000000000000000000 


!   CD  O) 

Esse 


S2,C  •  •  "  •cnfc::;cc 
S3pi^      «s  S^"XQja; 

H;pti^5<l,2;'-sH,-<c«0.^f-l 


00 

UN 
IH 

00 

>o 

HI 

00 
00 

HI 

00 
00 

HI 

00 

M 

00 


323 


On  Atmospheric  Magnetism, 

[Royal  Institution  Proceedings,  April  11,  1851.] 

On  a  former  evening  (January  24)  it  was  shown  that  oxygen 
gas  was  magnetic,  being  attracted  towards  the  poles  of  a  magnet ; 
and  that  Hke  other  magnetic  bodies,  it  lost  and  gained  in  power 
as  its  temperature  was  raised  and  lowered,  and  that  the  change 
occun-ed  within  the  range  of  natural  temperatures.  These  pro- 
perties it  carries  into  the  atmosphere;  and  the  object,  this 
evening,  was  to  show  how  far  they  might  be  applied  to  explain 
certain  of  the  observed  variations  of  the  terrestrial  magnetic  force. 

If  a  source  of  magnetic  power  be  considered  (as  a  magnet),  it 
presents  us  with  a  system  having  polarity ;  and  if  the  parts  which 
are  called  the  poles  be  taken  as  representing  the  most  concen- 
trated condition  of  the  polarity,  then  the  contrary  polarities, 
manifest  externally  in  relation  to  the  magnet,  are  perfectly  defi- 
nite, being  exactly  equal  to  each  other.  If  the  magnet  be 
irregular  in  the  disposition  of  its  force,  still  the  same  definite 
character  of  the  sum  of  the  contrary  polarities  holds  good. 

External  to  the  magnet  those  concentrations  which  are  named 
poles  may  be  considered  as  connected  by  what  are  called  mag- 
netic curves,  or  lines  of  magnetic  force,  existing  in  the  space 
around.  These  phrases  have  a  high  meaning,  and  represent  the 
ideality  of  magnetism.  They  imply  not  merely  the  directions  of 
force,  which  are  made  manifest  when  a  little  magnet,  or  a  crystal 
or  other  subject  of  magnetic  action  is  placed  amongst  them,  but 
those  Unes  of  power  which  connect  and  sustain  the  polarities, 
and  exist  as  much  when  there  is  no  magnetic  needle  or  crystal 
there  as  when  there  is  j  having  an  independent  existence  ana- 
logous to  (though  very  different  in  nature  from)  a  ray  of  light 
or  heat,  which,  though  it  be  present  in  a  given  space,  and  even 
occupies  time  in  its  transmission,  is  absolutely  insensible  to  us 
by  any  means  whilst  it  remains  a  ray,  and  is  only  made  known 
through  its  effects  where  it  ceases  to  exist.  The  form  of  a  line 
of  magnetic  foi-ce  may  vary  exceedingly  from  a  straight  line  to 
every  degree  of  curvature,  and  may  even  have  double-  and  com- 
pHcated  curvatures  impressed  upon  it.  Its  direction  is  deter- 
mined by  its  polarity,  the  two  changing  together.  Its  powers 
are  such,  that  a  magnetic  needle  placed  in  it  finds  its  place  of 

Y  2 


324 


Atmospheric  magnetism.         [April  1851. 


rest  parallel  to  it ;  a  crystal  of  calcareous  spar  turns  until  its 
optic  axis  is  transverse  to  it ;  and  a  wire  which  is  unaffected 
when  moved  in  or  along  it,  has  an  electric  current  evolved  the 
instant  that  it  passes  across  it :  by  these  and  by  other  means 
the  presence  of  the  magnetic  line  of  force  and  its  direction  are 
rendered  manifest. 

The  earth  is  a  great  magnet ;  its  power,  according  to  Gauss, 
being  equal  to  that  which  would  be  conferred  if  every  cubic  yard 
of  it  contained  six  one-pound  magnets ;  the  sum  of  the  force 
therefore  is  equal  to  8,464,000,000,000,000,000,000  such  mag- 
nets. The  disposition  of  this  magnetic  force  is  not  regular,  nor 
are  there  any  points  on  the  surface  which  can  be  properly  called 
poles :  still  the  regions  of  polarity  are  in  high  north  and  south 
latitudes ;  and  these  are  connected  by  lines  of  magnetic  force 
(being  the  lines  of  direction)  which,  generally  speaking,  rise  out 
of  the  earth  in  one  (magnetic)  hemisphere,  and  passing  in  varied 
directions  over  the  equatorial  regions  into  the  other  hemisphere, 
there  enter  into  the  earth  to  complete  the  known  circuit  of  power. 
A  free  needle  shows  the  presence  and  direction  of  these  lines. 
In  London  they,  issue  from  the  earth  at  an  angle  of  about  69° 
with  the  horizon  (being  the  dip  or  inclination)  ;  and  the  plane 
in  which  they  rise  forms  an  angle  of  23°  W.  nearly  with  true 
north,  giving  what  is  called  west  decHnation.  Where  the  dip 
is  small,  as  at  the  magnetic  equator,  these  lines  scarcely  rise  out 
of  the  earth  and  pass  but  a  little  way  above  the  surface ;  but 
where  it  is  large,  as  in  northern  or  southern  latitudes,  they  rise 
up  at  a  greater  angle,  and  pass  into  the  distant  realms  of  space, 
from  whence  they  return  again  to  the  earth  in  the  opposite 
magnetic  hemisphere ;  thus  investing  the  globe  with  a  system 
of  forces  hke  that  about  an  ordinary  magnet,  which,  wherever  it 
passes  through  the  atmosphere  is  subject  to  the  changing  action 
of  its  magnetic  oxygen.  There  is  every  reason  to  believe  that 
these  lines  are  held  in  the  earth,  out  of  which  they  arise  and  by 
which  they  arc  produced,  just  as  the  lines  which  originate  in  a 
magnet  are  held  by  it,  though  not  in  the  same  degree  ;  and  that 
any  disturbance  from  above  affecting  them  will  cause  a  greater 
change  in  their  place  and  direction  in  the  atmosphere  and  space 
above,  than  in  the  earth  beneath. 

The  system  of  lines  of  magnetic  force  around  a  magnet  or  the 
jearth  is  related  by  a  lateral  tension  of  the  whole,  analogous  in 


General  principles. 


325 


April  1851.] 

some  degree  to  the  lateral  tension  of  lines  of  static  electrical  force ; 
both  the  one  and  the  other  being  easily  made  manifest  by  experi- 
ment. The  disturbance  of  the  tension  in  one  part  is  accompanied 
instantly  by  a  disturbance  of  the  tension  in  every  other  part;  for 
as  the  sum  of  the  external  powers  of  a  system,  unaltered  at  its 
origin,  is  definite  and  cannot  be  changed ;  so  any  alteration 
either  of  intensity  or  direction  amongst  the  lines  of  force  at  one 
place,  must  be  accompanied  by  a  corresponding  change  at  every 
other.  So  if  a  mass  of  soft  iron  on  the  east  side  of  a  magnet 
causes  a  concentration  of  the  lines  of  force  from  the  magnet  on 
that  side,  a  corresponding  expansion  or  opening  out  of  the  lines 
on  the  west  side  must  be  and  is  at  the  same  time  produced ;  or 
if  the  sun,  on  rising  in  the  east,  renders  all  the  oxygen  of  the  air 
on  that  side  of  the  globe  less  magnetic  and  less  able  therefore  to 
favour  the  transition  of  the  lines  of  terrestrial  force  there,  a 
greater  number  of  them  will  be  determined  through  the  western 
region  ;  and  even  though  the  lines  of  force  may  be  doubted  by 
some  as  having  a  separate  existence  such  as  that  above  assumed, 
still  no  error  as  to  the  effects  on  magnetic  needles  would  in  that 
case  be  introduced,  for  they  by  experiment  would  be  and  are 
the  same. 

The  power  of  a  magnetic  body  as  iron  or  oxygen  to  favour 
the  transmission  of  lines  of  force  through  it  more  than  other 
bodies  not  magnetic,  may  be  expressed  by  the  term  conduction. 
Different  bodies,  as  iron,  nickel,  oxygen,  conduct  in  various 
degrees,  and  not  only  that,  but  the  same  body  as  iron  or  oxygen 
conducts  in  different  degrees  at  different  temperatures.  When 
space  traversed  by  uniform  lines  of  magnetic  force  is  occupied 
by  a  uniform  body  as  air,  the  disposition  of  the  lines  is  not 
altered ;  but  if  a  better  conducting  substance  than  the  air  is 
introduced,  so  as  to  occupy  part  of  the  space,  the  lines  are 
concentrated  in  it,  and  drawn  from  other  parts,  as  shown  by 
P,  P  in  the  figure,  or  if  a  worse  conducting  substance  is  intro- 


duced, the  lines  are  opened  out  as  at  D,  D.    In  both  cases  the 


326  Atmospheric  magnetism.         [April  1851. 

lines  of  force  are  inflected,  and  a  small  magnetic  needle  standing 
in  them  at  the  inflected  part  would  have  its  direction  changed 
accordingly.  Experimental  illustrations  of  these  changes  m 
direction  are  given  in  Mr.  Faraday^s  paper  in  the  Philosophical 
Transactions  for  1851,  Part  I.  par.  2843,  &c. 

Now  this  by  the  hypothesis  is  assumed  to  take  place  m  the 
atmosphere.    Supposing  it  all  at  mean  temperature,  the  lines  ot 
force  would  have  the  direction  determined  by  the  arrangement 
of  the  power  within  the  earth.    Then  the  sun's  presence  m  the 
east  would  make  all  the  atmosphere  in  that  region  a  worse  con- 
ductor,  and  cause  it  to  assume  the  character  of  D  ;  and  as  the 
sun  came  up  to  and  passed  over  the  meridian  and  away^to  the 
west,  the  atmosphere  under  his  influence  would  bring  up  changes 
in  direction  hke  those  shown  in  either  D  or  D ;  it  would  there- 
fore manifestly  set  a  needle  in  a  given  latitude  in  opposite  direc- 
tions as  it  passed  by ;  and  as  evidently  set  two  needles  m  north 
and  south  latitudes  in  opposite  directions  at  the  same  moment 
of  time.    As  the  night  came  on  and  a  temperature  lower  than 
the  mean  came  up  from  the  east  and  passed  over,  the  hues  ot 
force  would  be  inflected  as  in  P  or  P,  and  a  reverse  variation 
of  the  needle  to  that  which  occurred  before  would  now  take  place. 

That  natural  eff-ects  of  variation  must  be  produced  consequent 
upon  the  magnetic  nature  of  oxygen  and  its  daily  variations  of 
temperature  is  manifest;  but  whether  they  cause  the  observed 
variations,  or  are  competent  to  do  so,  is  a  question  that  can  only 
be  decided  after  very  careful  inquiry.    Observations  are  now 
made  on  the  surface  of  the  earth  with  extreme  care  in  many 
places,  and  these  are  collated,  and  the  average  or  mean  result, 
as  to  direction  and  intensity  of  the  earth's  force,  ascertained  for 
every  hour  and  season ;  and  also  many  remarkable,  anomalous 
and  extra  results  evolved.    A  theory  of  the  causes  of  any  or  all 
of  these  variations  may  be  examined  first  by  the  ^^r.c/^o,^  which 
the  varying  needle  does  or  ought  to  assume,  ana  then  by  the 
«.o.n/of  the  variation.    The  hypothesis  now  brought  for W 
has  been  compared  with  the  mean  daily  variation  for  all  the 
months  in  the  year  at  north  and  south  stations  as  Toronto  and 
Hobarton,  and  at  many  others  near  to  and  far  from  the  equa to 
and  agrees  in  direction  with  the  results  observed  far  beyond  w  a 
the  author  anticipated.    Thus  the  paths  described  by  the  upp  r 
ends  of  free  needles  in  the  north  and  south  hemispheres  should 


April  1851.]  General  principles.  327 

be  closed  curves,  with  the  motion  in  opposite  and  certain  direc- 
tions, and  so  they  are  :— the  curves  described  by  needles  in  north 
or  south  latitudes  should  be  larger  in  summer  and  smaller  in 
winter,  and  so  they  are a  night  or  cold  action  should  grow 
up  in  the  winter  months,  and  such  is  the  case  : — the  northern 
hemisphere  ought  to  have  a  certain  predominance  over  the 
southern,  because  of  its  superior  temperature,  and  that  is  so : — 
the  disposition  of  land  and  water  ought  to  have  an  influence, 
•  and  there  is  one  in  the  right  direction : — so  that  in  the  first 
statement  and  examination  of  the  hypothesis  it  appears  to  be 
remarkably  supported  by  the  facts.  All  these  coincidences  are 
particularly  examined  into  and  stated  in  the  Philosophical  Trans- 
actions already  referred  to.  The  next  step  will  be  to  ascertain 
what  is  the  amount  of  change  in  the  conducting  power  of  the  air 
for  given  changes  of  temperature,  and  then  to  apply  that  in  the 
endeavour  to  ascertain  whether  the  amount  of  change  to  be 
expected  is  (as  well  as  the  direction)  accordant  with  that  which 
really  occurs. 


328 


1^ 


TWENTY-EIGHTH  SERIES  ^  1 

§  34.  On  lines  of  Magnetic  Force;  their  definite  character;  and 
their  distribution  within  a  Magnet  and  through  space. 

Received  October  22 —Read  November  27  and  December  11,  1851. 

3070  From  ray  earliest  experiments  on  the  relation  of  electri- 
city and  magnetism  (114.  note),  I  have  had  to  think  and  speak 
of  lines  of  magnetic  force  as  representations  of  the  magnetic 
power:  not  merely  in  the  points  of  quality  and  direction,  but 
also  in  quantity.    The  necessity  I  was  under  of  a  more  frequent 
use  of  the  term  in  some  recent  researches  (2149.  &c.),  has  led 
me  to  beheve  that  the  time  has  arrived,  when  the  idea  conveyed 
by  the  phrase  should  be  stated  very  clearly,  and  should  also  be 
carefully  examined,  that  it  may  be  ascertained  how       it  may 
be  truly  apphed  in  representing  magnetic  conditions  and  phae- 
nomena;  how  far  it  may  be  useful  in  their  elucidation;  and 
also,  how  far  it  may  assist  in  leading  the  mind  correctly  on  to 
furtLer  conceptions  of  the  physical  nature  of  the  force  .^^^  ^he 
recognition  of  the  possible  effects,  either  new  or  old,  which  may 

'^CA^lin^e  of  magnetic  force  may  be  defined  as  that  line 
which  is  described  by  a  very  small  magnetic  needle  when  it  is 
so  moved  in  either  direction  correspondent  to  its  length,  that 

the  needle  is  constantly  a  tangent  to  "^^^T/^"'.:' 
that  hue  along  which,  if  a  transverse  wire  be  moved  m  either 
direc  ion,  there  is  no  tendency  to  the  formation  of  any  current 
"wire,  whilst  if  moved  in  any  other  ^^^ection  there  .^^^^^^ 
a  tendency  ;  or  it  is  that  line  wh:ch  coincides  w  h  ^^^^^^^^^^^ 

of  the  mag'necrystallic  axis  of  ^.^^^^  .h^^^^^^^ 
ried  in  either  direction  along  it.    Ihe  d  iection  oi 
abou    and  amongst  magnets  and  electne  currents,  is  eas^ 
represented  and  understood,  in  a  general  manner,  by  the  ordi- 
nary  use  of  iron  fihngs. 

'  PhilosophicalTransactions,  1852,  p.  1. 


Oct.  1851.]         Definition  of  lines  of  force. 


329 


3072.  These  lines  have  not  merely  a  determinate  direction, 
recognizable  as  above  (3071.)?  but  because  they  are  related  to  a 
polar  or  antithetical  power,  have  opposite  qualities  or  conditions 
in  opposite  directions ;'  these  qualities,  which  have  to  be  distin- 
guished and  identified,  are  made  manifest  to  us,  either  by  the 
position  of  the  ends  of  the  magnetic  needle,  or  by  the  direction 
of  the  current  induced  in  the  moving  wire. 

3073.  A  point  equally  important  to  the  definition  of  these 
lines  is,  that  they  represent  a  determinate  and  unchanging 
amount  of  force.  Though,  therefore,  their  forms,  as  they  exist 
between  two  or  more  centres  or  sources  of  magnetic  power,  may 
vary  very  greatly,  and  also  the  space  through  which  they  may 
be  traced,  yet  the  sum  of  power  contained  in  any  one  section 
of  a  given  portion  of  the  lines  is  exactly  equal  to  the  sum  of 
power  in  any  other  section  of  the  same  lines,  however  altered  in 
form,  or  however  convergent  or  divergent  they  may  be  at  the 
second  place.  The  experimental  proof  of  this  character  of  the 
lines  will  be  given  hereafter  (3109.  &c.). 

3074.  Now  it  appears  to  me  that  these  lines  maybe  employed 
with  great  advantage  to  represent  the  nature,  condition,  direction 
and  comparative  amount  of  the  magnetic  forces  ;  and  that  in 
many  cases  they  have,  to  the  physical  reasoner  at  least,  a  supe- 
riority over  that  method  which  represents  the  forces  as  concen- 
trated in  centres  of  action,  such  as  the  poles  of  magnets  or 
needles;  or  some  other  methods,  as,  for  instance,  that  which 
considers  north  or  south  magnetisms  as  fluids  diffused  over  the 
ends  or  amongst  the  particles  of  a  bar.  No  doubt,  any  of  these 
methods  which  does  not  assume  too  much,  will,  with  a  faithful 
application,  give  true  results;  and  so  they  all  ought  to  give  the 
same  results  as  far  as  they  can  respectively  be  applied.  But 
some  may,  by  their  very  nature,  be  appHcable  to  a  far  greater 
extent,  and  give  far  more  varied  results,  than  others.  For  just 
as  either  geometry  or  analysis  may  be  employed  to  solve  cor- 
rectly a  particular  problem,  though  one  has  far  more  power  and 
capability,  generally  speaking,  than  the  other ;  or  just  as  either 
the  idea  of  the  reflexion  of  images,  or  that  of  the  reverberation 
of  sounds  may  be  used  to  represent  certain  physical  forces  and 
conditions;  so  may  the  idea  of  the  attractions  and  repulsions  of 
centres,  or  that  of  the  disposition  of  magnetic  fluids,  or  that  of 
Imes  of  force,  be  applied  in  the  consideration  of  magnetic  ph»- 


3S0  On  lines  of  magnetic  force,    [Sebieb  XXVIII. 

nomena.    It  is  the  occasional  and  more  frequent  use  of  the 
latter  which  I  at  present  wish  to  advocate. 

3075  I  desire  to  restrict  the  meaning  of  the  term  hne  offeree, 
so  that  it  shall  imply  no  more  than  the  condition  of  the  force  m 
any  riven  place,  as  to  strength  and  direction  ;  and  not  to  mclude 
(at  present)  any  idea  of  the  nature  of  the  physical  cause  of  the 
pheenomena;  or  be  tied  up  with,  or  in  any  way  dependent  on, 
such  an  idea.    Still,  there  is  no  impropriety  m  endeavouring 
to  conceive  the  method  in  which  the  physical  forces  are  either 
excited,  or  exist,  or  are  transmitted ;  nor,  when  these  by  experi- 
ment and  comparison  are  ascertained  in  any  given  degree,  m 
representing  them  by  any  method  which  we  adopt  to  represent 
the  mere  forces,  provided  no  error  is  thereby  introduced.  On 
the  contrary,  when  the  natural  truth  and  the  conventional  repre- 
sentation of  it  most  closely  agree,  then  are  we  most  advanced  m 
our  knowledge.    The  emission  and  the  aether  theories  present 
Th  cases  if  relation  to  light.    The  idea  o  a  fluid  or  of  two 
fluids  is  the  same  for  electricity;  and  there  the  fur  her  idea  of  a 
cu  rent  has  been  raised,  which  indeed  has  such  hold  on  the  mmd 
as  occasionally  to  embarrass  the  science  as  respects  the  true 
ha^  tcr  of  th'e  physical  agencies,  and  may  be  doing  so  even 
now,  to  a  degree  which  we  at  present  little  suspect.    The  same 
Ts  ^e  case  with  the  ideaof  a  magnetic  fluid  orfluids  or  wi  h  tl^e 
assumption  of  magnetic  centres  of  action  of  which  the  resultants 
are  aT  the  poles.    How  the  magnetic  force  is  transferred  through 
bodit  or  through  space  we  know  not -.-whether  the  result  is 
merely  action  at  a  distance,  as  in  the  case  of  gravity  ;  or  by  some 
Xtediate  agency,  as  in  the  cases  of  light,  heat,  the  e  eetr. 
current  and  (as  I  believe)  static  electric  action.  The  idea  ot  mag 
„e  c  fluids,  as  applied  by  some,  or  of  magnetic  centres  of  action 
dots  not  include  that  of  the  latter  kind  of  transmission,  but  the 
fdea  of        "f  f"''^^  Nevertheless,  because  a  particular 

mithod  of  representing  the  forces  does  not  include  such  a  mode 
Tftant^ission,  the  latter  is  not  therefore  ^is^roved^  and  tha 
method  of  representation  which  harmonizes  with  it  may 
most  true  to  nature.  The  general  conclusion  of  phUosop  leis 
"ems  to  be,  that  such  cases  are  by  far  the  most  numerous,  and  for 
xlv  own  pa  t,  considering  the  relation  of  a  vacuum  to  the  mag- 
netic force  and  the  general  character  of  nragnetic  pha^nomena  ex- 
"rnal  to  tie  magnef,  I  am  more  inclined  to  the  notion  that  in  the 


Oct.  1851.]     their  I'ecognition — by  a  moving  wire.  331 

transmission  of  the  force  there  is  such  an  action,  external  to  the 
magnet,  than  that  the  etFects  are  merely  attraction  and  repulsion 
at  a  distance.  Such  an  action  may  be  a  function  of  the  iether  ; 
for  it  is  not  at  all  unlikely  that,  if  there  be  an  aether,  it  should 
have  other  uses  than  simply  the  conveyance  of  radiations  (2591. 
2787.)'  Perhaps  when  we  are  more  clearly  instructed  in  this 
matter,  we  shall  see  the  source  of  the  contradictions  which  are 
supposed  to  exist  between  the  results  of  Coulomb,  Harris  and 
other  philosophers,  and  find  that  they  are  not  contradictions  in 
reality,  but  mere  differences  in  degree,  dependent  upon  partial 
or  imperfect  views  of  the  phaenomena  and  their  causes. 


3076.  Lines  of  magnetic  force  may  be  recognized,  either  by 
their  action  on  a  magnetic  needle,  or  on  a  conducting  body 
moving  across  them.  Each  of  these  actions  may  be  employed 
also  to  indicate,  either  the  direction  of  the  line,  or  the  force 
exerted  at  any  given  point  in  it,  and  this  they  do  with  advan- 
tages for  the  one  method  or  the  other  under  particular  circum- 
stances. The  actions  are  however  very  different  in  their  nature. 
The  needle  shows  its  results  by  attractions  and  repulsions ;  the 
moving  conductor  or  wire  shows  it  by  the  production  of  a 
current  of  electricity.  The  latter  is  an  effect  entirely  unlike  that 
produced  on  the  needle,  and  due  to  a  different  action  of  the 
forces ;  so  that  it  gives  a  view  and  a  result  of  properties  of  the 
lines  of  force,  such  as  the  attractions  and  repulsions  of  the  needle 
could  never  show.  For  this  and  other  reasons  I  propose  to 
develope  and  apply  the  method  by.  a  moving  conductor  on  the 
present  occasion. 

3077.  The  general  principles  of  the  development  of  an  electric 
current  in  a  wire  moving  under  the  influence  of  magnetic  forces, 
were  given  on  a  former  occasion,  in  the  First  and  Second  Series 
of  these  Researches  (36.  &c.) ;  it  will  therefore  be  unnecessary  to 
do  more  than  to  call  attention,  at  this  time,  to  the  special 
character  of  its  indications  as  compared  to  those  of  a  magnetic 
needle,  and  to  show  how  it  becomes  a  peculiar  and  important 
addition  to  it,  in  the  illustration  of  magnetic  action. 

3078.  The  moving  wire  produces  its  greatest  effect  and  indi- 
cation, not  when  passing  from  stronger  to  weaker  places,  or  the 
reverse,  but  when  moving  in  places  of  equal  action,  i.  e.  trans- 
versely across  the  lines  of  force  (217.). 


332  On  lines  of  magnetic  force,    [Series  XXVIII. 

3079.  It  determines  the  direction  of  the  polarity  by  an  effect 
entirely  independent  of  pointing  or  such  like  results  of  attraction 
or  repulsion ;  i.  e.  by  the  direction  of  the  electric  current  pro- 
duced  in  it  during  the  motion  \  •     •  r 

3080.  The  principle  can  be  appUed  to  the  exammation  ot  the 
forces  within  numerous  sohd  bodies,  as  the  metals,  as  well  as 
outside  in  the  air.  It  is  not  often  embarrassed  by  the  difference 
of  the  surrounding  media,  and  can  be  used  in  fluids,  gases  or  a 
vacuum  with  equal  facility.  Hence  it  can  penetrate  and  be 
employed  where  the  needle  is  forbidden ;  and  in  other  cases 
where  the  needle  might  be  resorted  to,  though  greatly  embar- 
rassed by  the  media  around  it,  the  moving  wire  may  be  used 
with  an  immediate  result  (3142.). 

3081.  The  method  can  even  be  applied  with  equal  tacihty  to 
the  interior  of  a  magnet  (3116.),  a  place  utterly  inaccessible  to 
the  magnetic  needle.  . 

3082.  The  moving  wire  can  be  made  to  sum  up  or  give  tne 
resultant  at  once  of  the  magnetic  action  at  many  different  places, 
i  e  the  action  due  to  an  area  or  section  of  the  hnes  of  force, 
and  so  supply  experimental  comparisons  which  the  needle  could 
not  give,  except  with  very  great  labour,  and  then  imperfectly. 
Whether  the  wire  moves  directly  or  obhquely  across  the  hnes 
of  force,  in  one  direction  or  another,  it  sums  up,  with  the  same 
accuracy  in  principle,  the  amount  of  the  forces  represented  by 
the  lines  it  has  crossed  (3113.). 

3083.  So  a  moving  wire  may  be  accepted  as  a  correct  philoso- 
phical indication  of  the  presence  of  magnetic  force.  Illustrations 
of  the  capabihties  already  referred  to,  will  arise  and  be  pointed 
out  in  the  present  paper;  and  though  its  sensibility  does  not 
as  yet  approach  to  that  of  the  magnetic  needle,  still,  there  is  no 
doubt  that  it  may  be  very  greatly  increased.  The  diversity  of 
its  possible  arrangements,  and  the  great  advantage  of  that  divei- 
ly  is  already  very  manifest  to  myself.  Though  both  it  and 
tLenee^e  depend  for  their  results  upon  essential  characters  and 

1  A  natural  standard  of  this  polarity  may  be  obtained,  by  referring  to  the 
lines  of  force  of  the  earth,  in  the  northern  hemisphere,  thus  :-jf  a  P-son  w  tl 
arms  extended  move  forward  in  these  latitudes,  then  the  ^-ct.-  o  ^ 
electric  current,  which  would  tend  to  be  produced  m  a  wire  represented  by  he 
arms,  would  b^  from  the  right-hand  through  the  arm  and  body  towards  the 

left. 


Oct.  1851.]      their  investiffation — by  experiment.  333 


qualities  of  the  magnetic  force,  yet  those  which  are  influential, 
and,  therefore  indicated,  in  the  one  case,  are  very  different  from 
those  which  are  active  in  the  other ;  I  mean,  as  far  as  we  have 
been  able  as  yet  to  refer  directly  the  effects  to  essential  charac- 
ters :  and  this  difference  may,  hereafter,  enable  the  wire  to  give 
a  new  insight  into  the  nature  of  the  magnetic  force ;  and  so 
it  may,  finally,  bear  upon  inquiries,  such  as  whether  magnetic 
polarity  is  axial  or  dependent  upon  transverse  lateral  conditions ; 
whether  the  transmission  of  the  force  is  after  the  manner  of  a 
vibration  or  current,  or  simply  action  at  a  distance  ;  and  the 
many  other  questions  that  arise  in  the  minds  of  those  who  are 
pursuing  this  branch  of  knowledge. 


Fig.  1. 


3084.  I  will  proceed  to  take  the  case  of  a  simple  bar  magnet, 
employing  it  in  illustration  of  what  has  been  said  respecting  the 
lines  of  force  and  the  moving  conductor,  and  also  for  the  purpose 
of  ascertaining  how  these  lines  of  force  are  disposed,  both 
without  and  within  the  magnet  itself,  upon  which  they  are 
dependent  or  to  which  they  belong.  For  this  purpose  the  fol- 
lowing apparatus  was 
employed.  Let  fig.  1  re- 
present a  wooden  stand, 
of  which  the  base  is  a 
board  17'5  inches  in 
length,  and  6  inches  in 
breadth,  and  0*8  of  an 
inch  in  thickness  :  these 
dimensions  will  serve  as 
a  scale  for  the  other  parts. 
A  B  are  two  wooden  uprights  ;  D  is  an  axis  of  wood  having  two 
long  depressions  cut  into  it,  for  the  purpose  of  carrying  the  two 
bar  magnets  F  and  G.  The  wood  is  not  cut  away  quite  across 
the  axis,  but  is  left  in  the  middle,  so  that  the  magnets  are 
about  yij-th  of  an  inch  apart.  From  O  towards  the  support  A, 
it  is  removed,  however,  as  low  down  as  the  axis  of  revolution,  so 
as  to  form  a  notch  between  the  two  magnets  when  they  are  in 
their  places ;  and  by  further  removal  of  the  wood,  this  notch  is 
continued  on  to  the  end  of  the  axis  at  P.  This  notch,  or 
openmg,  is  intended  to  receive  a  wire,  which  can  be  carried 


334  On  lines  of  magnetic  force.    [Series  XXVIII. 

down  the  axis  of  rotation,  and  then  passing  out  between  the  two 
magnets,  anywhere  between  O  and  N,  can  be  returned  towards 
the  end  P  on  the  outside.    The  magnets  are  so  placed,  that  the 
central  line  of  their  compound  system  coincides  with  the  axis 
of  rotation ;  E  being  a  handle  by  which  rotation,  when jequu-ed, 
is  mven.    H  and  I  are  two  copper  rings,  slipping  tightly  on  to 
the  axis,  by  which  communication  is  to  be  made  between  a  wire 
adjusted  so  as  to  revolve  with  the  magnets  and  the  feed  ends 
of  wires  proceeding  from  a  galvanometer    Thus,  let  P  L  repre- 
sent a  covered  wire;  which  being  led  along  the  bottom  of  the 
notch  in  the  axis  of  the  apparatus,  and  passing  out  at  the 
equatorial  parts  of  the  magnets,  returns  into  the  notch  apm 
near  N,  and  terminates  at  K.    When  the  form  of  the  wire  loop 
is  determined  and  given  to  it,  then  a  little  piece  of  soft  wood  is 
placed  between  the  wires  in  the  notch  at  K,  of  such  thickness, 
that  when  the  ring  I  is  put  into  its  place  it  shall  press  upon 
the  upper  wire,  the  piece  of  wood,  and  the  lower  wire,  and  keep 
all  tightly  fixed  together,  and  at  the  same  time  leave  the  two 
wires  effectually  separated.    The  second  rmg,  H,  is  then  put 
Tnto  its  place  on  the  axis,  and  the  introduction  of  a  small  wedge 
of  wood,  at  the  end  of  the  axis,  serves  to  press  the  end  P  into 
c  ole  and  perfect  contact  with  the  ring  H,  and  keep  all  in  order 
So  tie  wi^e  is  free  to  revolve  with  the  magnets,  and  he  nngs 
H  and  I  are  its  virtual  terminations.    Two  clips,  as  at  C  hold 
the  ends  of  the  galvanometer  wire  (also  of  copper) ;  and  the  latter 
*  made  to  press  against  the  rings  by  their  elasticity,  and  give 
rn  effectual  contact  bearing,  which  generates  no  current,  either 
by  c^ffe-nce  of  nature  or  by  friction,  during  the  revolution  of 


3085  '  The  two  magnets  are  bars,  each  12  inches  long,  1  inch 
bro^d  ;nd  0-4  of  an  Inch  thick.   They  weigh  each  19  ounces 
and  te  of  such  a  strength  as  to  lift  each  other  end  to  end  and 
no  more    When  the  two  are  adjusted  in  their  place,  it  is  with 
2':°^Uarpoles  togeth.  s  « 
-ai'Ah  a  division  down  the  miaaie  .  wie^  o-^^ 
^e  by  t^ing,  or,  at  times,  by  a  ring  of  copper  which  shps 

"'^^eThelL— T'a  very  delicate  instrument  made 
bv  Zmko.-l(2G51.).  It  was  placed  about  6  fe^t  .from  te 
magne^rpparatus,  and  was  not  affected  by  any  revolution  of  the 


Oct.  1851.]        The  moving  wire — its  action. 


335 


lattei'.  The  wires,  connecting  it  with  the  magnets,  were  of 
copper,  0*04  of  an  inch  in  diameter,  and  in  their  whole  length 
about  25  feet.  The  length  of  the  wire  in  the  galvanometer  I  do 
not  know;  its  diameter  was  i^jih.  of  an  inch.  The  condition 
of  the  galvanometer,  wires,  and  magnets,  was  such,  that  when 
the  bend  of  the  wires  was  formed  into  a  loop,  and  that  carried 
once  over  the  pole  of  the  united  mag- 
nets, as  from  a  to  b,  fig.  2,  the  galvano- 
meter needle  was  deflected  two  degrees 
or  more.  The  vibration  of  the  needle 
was  slow,  and  it  was  easy  therefore  to 
reiterate  this  action  five  or  six  times,  or 
oftener,  breaking  and  making  contact 
with  the  galvanometer  at  right  inter- 
vals, so  as  to  combine  the  effect  of  like 
induced  currents;  and  then  a  deflection 
of  10°  or  15°  on  either  side  of  zero  could  be  readily  obtained. 
The  arrangement,  therefore,  was  sufficiently  sensible  for  first 
experiments ;  and  though  the  resistance  opposed  by  the  thin  long  " 
galvanometer  wire  to  feeble  currents  was  considerable,  yet  it 
would  always  be  the  same,  and  would  not  interfere  with  results, 
where  the  final  effect  was  equal  to  0°,  nor  in  those  where  the 
consequences  were  shown,  not  by  absolute  measurement,  but  by 
comparative  differences. 

3087.  The  first  practical  result  produced  by  the  apparatus 
described,  in  respect  of  magneto-electric  induction  generally,  is, 
that  a  piece  of  metal  or  conducting  matter  which  moves  across 
lines  of  magnetic  force,  has,  or  tends  to  have,  a  current  of  elec- 
tricity produced  in  it.  A  more  restricted  and  precise  expression 
of  the  full  effect  is  the  following.  If  a  continuous  circuit  of 
conducting  matter  be  traced  out,  or  conceived  of,  either  in  a 
solid  or  fluid  mass  of  metal  or  conducting  matter,  or  in  wires  or 
bars  of  metal  arranged  in  non-conducting  matter  or  space; 
which  being  moved,  crosses  lines  of  magnetic  force,  or  being 
still,  is  by  the  translation  of  a  magnet  crossed  by  such  lines  of 
force ;  and  further,  if,  by  inequality  of  angular  motion,  or  by 
contrary  motion  of  different  parts  of  the  circuit,  or  by  inequality 
of  the  motion  in  the  same  direction,  one  part  crosses  either  more 
or  fewer  lines  than  the  other ;  then  a  current  will  exist  round  it, 
due  to  the  differential  relation  of  the  two  or  more  intersecting 


336  On  lines  of  magnetic  force.    [Series  XXVIII. 

parts  during  the  time  of  the  motion  :  the  direction  of  which  cur- 
rent will  be  determined  (with  lines  having  a  given  direction  ot 
polarity)  by  the  direction  of  the  intersection,  combined  with  the 
relative  amount  of  the  intersection  in  the  two  or  more  efficient 
and  determining  (or  intersecting)  parts  of  the  circuit. 

3088.  Thus,  if  fig.  3  represent  a  magnetic  pole  N,  and  over  it 

Fig.  3. 


•A- 


/ 


I' 


a  circuit,  formed  of  metal,  which  may 
be  of  any  shape,  and  which  is  at  first 
in  the  position  c ;  then  if  that  circuit  be 
moved  in  one  direction  into  the  posi- 
tion 1 ;  or  in  the  contrary  direction  into 
position  2;  or  by  a  double  direction  of 
motion  into  position  3;  or  by  translation 
into  position  4  ;  or  into  position  5  ;  or 
any  position  between  the  first  and  these 
or  any  resembling  them;  or,  if  the 
first  position  c  being  retained,  the  pole 
move  to,  or  towards,  the  position  n;  ' 
then,  an  electric  current  will  be  produced  in  the  circuit,  having 
in  every  case  the  same  direction,  being  that  which  is  marked  in 
the  figure  by  arrows.    Reverse  motions  will  give  currents  m  the 

reverse  direction  (256.  &c.),  r   i    +  •  i 

3089.  The  general  principles  of  the  production  of  electrical 
currents  by  magnetic  induction  have  been  formerly  given 

2  .  &c.)  S  and  the  law  of  the  direction  of  the  current  m  relation 
io  the  lines  of  force,  stated  (114.  3079.  note).  But  the  full 
meaning  of  the  above  description  can  only  be  appreciated  here- 
after when  the  experimental  results,  which  supply  a  larger 
knowledge  of  the  relations  of  the  current  to  the  lines  of  Jorce, 

have  been  described. 

3090.  When  lines  of  force  are  spoken  of  as  crossing  a  con- 
ducting circuit  (3087.),  it  m"^t  ^  considered  as  efifeeted  by  the 
tat/««»  of  a  magnit.    No  "ere  rotation  of  a  bar  .^gne  n 
its  axis,  produces  any  induction  effect  on  circuits  exte  lor  to  it 
for  tU  the  conditions  above  described  (3088.)  are  -t  fulBlkd 
Thesys  em  of  power  about  the  magnet  must  not  be  considered  as 
„ ece  Lily  revolving  with  the  magnet,  any  more  than  the  rays  of 
light  which  emanate  from  the  sun  are  supposed  to  revolve  with  the 

»  Philosophical  Transactions,  1832,  p.  131,  &c. 


Oct.  1851.  J  outside  of  a  magnet ,  337 

sun.  The  magnet  may  even,  in  certain  cases  (3097.),  be  consi- 
dered as  revolving  amongst  its  own  forces,  and  producing  a  full 
electric  effect,  sensible  at  the  galvanometer. 


3091.  In  the  first  instance  the  wire  was  carried  down  the 
axis  of  the  magnet  to  the  middle  distance,  then  led  out  at  the 
equatorial  part,  and  returned  on  the  outside ;  fig.  4  will  repre- 
sent such  a  disposition.   Supposing  Fjo-.  4. 
■  the  magnet  and  wire  to  revolve  once, 
it  is  evident  that  the  wire  a  may  be 
considered  as  passing  in  at  the  axis 
of  the  magnet,  and  returning  from 
b  across  the  lines  of  force  external 
to  the  magnet,  to  the  axis  again  at  c;  and  that  in  one  revolution, 
the  wire  from  h  io  c  has  intersected  once,  all  the  lines  of  force 
emanating  from  the  N  end  of  the  magnet.    In  other  words, 
whatever  course  the  wire  may  take  from  h  to  c,  the  whole  system 
of  lines  belonging  to  the  magnet  has  been  once  crossed  by  the 
wire.    In  order  to  have  a  correct  notion  of  the  relation  of  the 
result,  we  will  suppose  a  person  standing  at  the  handle  E,  fig.  1 
(3084.),  and  looking  along  the  magnets,  the  magnets  being 
fixed,  and  the  wire  loop  from  ^  to  c  turned  over  toward  the  left- 
hand  into  a  horizontal  plane;  then,  if  that  loop  be  moved  over 
towards  the  right-hand,  the  magnet  remaining  stationary,  it  will 
be  equivalent  to  a  direct  revolution  (according  to  the  hands  of 
a  watch  or  clock)  of  180°,  and  will  produce  a  feeble  current  in 
a  given  direction  at  the  galvanometer.    If  it  be  carried  back 
180°  in  the  reverse  direction,  it  will  produce  a  corresponding 
current  in  the  reverse  direction  to  the  former.    If  the  wire  be 
held  in  a  vertical,  or  any  other  plane,  so  that  it  may  be  consi- 
dered as  fixed,  and  the  magnet  be  rotated  through  half  a  revo- 
lution, it  will  also  produce  a  current ;  and  if  rotated  in  the 
contrary  direction,  will  produce  a  contrary  current ;  but  as  to 
the  direction  of  the  currents,  that  produced  by  the  direct  revo- 
lution of  the  wire  is  the  same  as  that  produced  by  the  reverse 
revolution  of  the  magnet ;  and  that  produced  by  the  reverse 
revolution  of  the  wire  is  the  same  as  that  produced  by  the  direct 
revolution  of  the  magnet.     A  more  precise  reference  of  the 
direction  of  the  current  to  the  particular  pole  employed,  and 
the  direction  of  the  revolution  of  the  wire  or  magnet,  is  not  at 

VOL.  Til. 


338  On  lines  of  magnetic  force    [Series  XXVIII. 

present  necessary ;  but  if  required  is  obtained  at  once  by  re- 
ference  to  fig.  3  (3088.),  or  to  the  general  law  (114.  3079.  note). 

3092.  The  magnet  and  loop  being  rotated  together  m  either 
direction,  no  trace  of  an  electric  current  was  produced.    In  this 
case  the  effect,  if  any,  could  be  greatly  exalted,  because  the 
rotation  could  be  continued  for  10,  20,  or  any  number  of  revo- 
lutions without  derangement,  and  it  was  easy  to  make  thirty 
revolutions  or  more  within  the  time  of  the  swing  of  the  galva- 
nometer needle  in  one  direction.    It  was  also  easy,  if  any  effect 
were  produced,  to  accumulate  it  upon  the  galvanometer  by 
reversing  the  rotation  at  the  due  time.    But  no  amount  of  revo- 
lution of  the  magnet  and  wire  together  could  produce  any  effect 
3093  The  loop  was  then  taken  out  of  the  axis  of  the  magnet, 
but  attached  to  it  by  a  piece  of  pasteboard,  so  that  all  should  be 
fixed  together  and  revolve  with  the  Fig.  5. 

same  angular  velocity,  fig.  5  ;  but 
whatever  the  shape  or  disposition  of 
the  loop,  whether  large  or  small,  near 
or  distant,  open  or  shut,  in  one  plane,  _ 
or  contorted  into  variousplanes;  what-  . ,  ,  , 
ever  the  shape  or  condition,  or  place,  provided  it  moved  alto- 
gether with  the  magnet,  no  current  was  produced. 
^  3094.  Furthermore,  when  the  loop  was  out  of  the  magnets, 
and  by  expedients  of  arrangement,  was  retained  immoveable, 
whilst  the  magnet  revolved,  no  amount  of  rotation  of  the  mag- 
It  (unaccomp  of  place)  produced  any  degree 

nf  rnrrent  through  the  loop. 

3095  The  loop  of  wire  was  then  made  of  two  parts ;  the  por- 
tion c,  fig.  6,  on  the  outside  of  the  Fig.  6. 
magnet,  was  fixed  at  b,  and  the 
portion  a,  being  a  separate  piece, 

was  carried  along  the  axis  until  it   

came  in  contact  with  the  former  ^  fm^^,,^^ 
sif  f1  ■  the  revolution  of  one  part 

was  *us  permitted  either  with  or  without  the  other  yet  pre- 
Terving  always  metallic  contact  and  a  complete  c.rcmt  for  he 
induced  cunent.  In  this  case,  when  the  external  wire  and  the 
n  t  were  fixed,  no  current  was  produced  by  any  amount  o 
TvoMon  of  the  wire  a  on  its  axis.  Nether  was  any  cm-rent 
produced  when  the  magnet  and  wire,  .  d,  were  revolved  to- 


i 


Oct.  1851.]       within  and  without  a  magnet. 


339 


gethei',  whether  the  wire  a  revolved  with  them  or  not.  When 
the  magnet  was  revolved  without  the  external  part  of  c  or  the 
latter  revolved  without  the  magnet,  then  currents  were  produced 
as  before  (3091.). 

3096.  The  magnet  was  now  included  in  the  circuit,  in  the 
following  manner.  The  wire  a, 
fig.  7i  was  placed  in  metallic  con- 
tact on  both  sides  of  the  interval 
between  the  magnets  at  N  (or  the  ^ 
pole),  and  the  part  c  was  brought  ^ 
into  contact  with  the  centre  at  d. 
The  result  was  in  everything  the  same  as  when  the  wire  a  was 
continued  up  to  c?,  i.  e.  no  amount  of  revolution  of  the  magnet 
and  part  c  together  could  produce  any  electi'ic  current.  When 
c  was  made  to  terminate  at  e  or  the  equatorial  part  of  the  mag- 
net, the  result  was  precisely  the  same.  Also,  when  c  terminated 
at  e,  the  part  a  of  the  wire  was  continued  to  the  centre  at  d, 
and  there  the  contact  perfected,  but  the  result  was  still  the  same. 
No  difference,  therefore,  was  produced,  by  the  use  between  N 
and  d,  or  d  and  e,  of  the  parts  of  the  magnet  in  place  of  an  insu- 
lated copper  wire,  for  the  completion  of  the  circuit  in  which  the 
induced  cuiTcnt  was  to  travel.  No  rotation  of  the  part  a  pro- 
duced any  effect,  wherever  it  was  made  to  terminate. 

3097.  In  order  to  obtain  the  power  of  rotating  the  magnet 
without  the  external  part  of  the  wire,  a  copper  ring  was  fixed 
round,  and  in  contact  with  it  at  the  equatorial  part,  and  the 
wire  c,  fig.  8,  made  to  bear  by 
spring  pressure  against  this  ring, 
and  also  against  the  ring  H  on 
the  axis,  fig.  1  (3084.) ;  the  circuit  c_ 
was  examined,  and  found  com-  "~ 
plete.  Now  when  the  wire  c  e  was 
fixed  and  the  magnet  rotated,  a  current  was  produced,  and  that 
to  the  same  amount  for  the  same  number  of  revolutions,  whether 
the  part  of  the  wire  a  terminated  at  N,  or  was  continued  on  to 
the  centre  of  the  magnet,  or  was  insulated  from  the  magnet  and 
continued  up  to  the  copper  ring  e.  When  the  wire,  by  expe- 
dients, which  though  rough  were  sufficient,  was  made  to  revolve 
whilst  the  magnet  was  still,  currents  in  the  contrary  direction 
were  produced,  in  accordance  with  the  effect  before  described 

z  2 


340  On  lines  of  magnetic  force    [Series  XXVIII. 

(3091.);  and  the  results  when  the  wire  and  magnet  rotated 
top-ether  (3092.),  show  that  these  are  in  amount  exactly  equal 
to  the  former.  When  the  inner  and  the  outer  wires  were  both 
motionless,  and  the  magnet  only  revolved,  a  current  m  the  full 
proportion  was  produced,  and  that,  whether  the  axial  wire  a  made 
contact  at  the  pole  of  the  magnet  or  in  the  centre  _ 

3098.  Another  arrangement  of  the  magnet  and  wires  was  ot 
the  following  kind.  A  radial  insulated  wire  was  fixed  in  the 
middle  of  the  magnets,  from  the  Fig.  9. 

centre  d,  fig.  9,  to  the  circumfe- 
rence b,  being  connected  there 
with  the  equatorial  ring  (3097-) ; 
an  axial  wire  touched  this  radial 
wire  at  the  centre  and  passed  out  ^i,     •  „ 

at  the  pole :  the  external  part  of  the  circuit,  pressmg  on  the  rmg 
a  he  equa  or,  proceeded  on  the  outside  over  the  pole  to  form 
L  communic'ation  as  before.  In  the  case  where  the  magne 
was  revolved  without  the  axial  and  the  -^rnal  wire  the  full 
and  proper  current  was  produced;  the  small  wire,  ^  6,  being, 
however  the  only  part  in  which  this  current  could  be  gene- 
'irby  the  motL';  for  it  replaced,  under  these 
the  body  of  the  magnet  employed  on  the  former  occasion  (309  /  . 

3099.  The  external  part  of  the  wire  instead  of  bemg  cai- 
ried  back  over  that  pole  of  the  magnet  at  which  the  axial  wire 
entered,  was  continued  away  over  the  other  pole,  and  so  round 
by  Hong  circuit  to  the  galvanometer;  still  the  revolution  of  he 
magnet,  under  any  of  the  described  circumstances,  produced 
exactly  the  same  results  as  before.  Fig.  lo. 

It  will  be  evident  by  inspection  of 
fig.  10,  that,  however  the  wires  are 
carried  away,  the  general  result 
will,  according  to  the  assumed  prin- 
ciples of  action,  be  the  same ;  for  if 

a  be  the  axial  wire,  and  6,  6  ,  « 
the  equatorial  wire,  represented  in 
three  different  positions,  whatever 
magnetic  hues  of  force  pass  across 

the  latter  wire  in  one  P—  i^ion  which 


Oct.  1851.] 


surrounding  a  magnet. 


341 


intersection  with  the  lines  of  force,  has  been  shown,  by  the 
experiments  (3093.),  to  be  unimportant. 

3100.  Whilst  considering  the  condition  of  the  forces  of  a 
magnet,  it  may  be  admitted,  that  the  two  magnets  used  in  the 
experimental  investigations  described,  act  truly  as  one  central 
magnet.    We  have  only  to  conceive  smaller  similar  magnets  to 
be  introduced  to  fill  up  the  narrow  space  not  occupied  by  the 
.  wire,  and  then  the  complete  magnet  would  be  realized  : — or  it 
may  be  viewed  as  a  magnet  once  perfect,  which  has  had  certain 
parts  removed;  and  we  know  that  neither  of  these  changes 
would  disturb  the  general  disposition  of  the  forces.     In  and 
around  the  bar  magnet  the  forces  are  distributed  in  the  simplest 
and  most  regular  manner.    Supposing  the  bar  removed  from 
other  magnetic  influences,  then  its  power  must  be  considered  as 
extending  to  any  distance,  according  to  the  recognized  law ;  but, 
adopting  the  representative  idea  of  lines  of  force  (3074.),  any 
wire  or  line  proceeding  from  a  point  in  the  magnetic  equator  of 
the  bar,  over  one  of  the  poles,  so  as  to  pass  through  the  magnetic 
axis,  and  so  on  to  a  point  on  the  opposite  side  of  the  magnetic 
equator,  must  intersect  all  the  lines  in  the  plane  through  which 
it  passes,  whether  its  course  be  over  the  one  pole  or  the  other. 
So  also  a  wire  proceeding  from  the  end  of  the  magnet  at  the 
magnetic  axis,  to  a  point  at  the  magnetic  equator,  must  intersect 
curves  equal  to  half  those  of  a  great  plane,  however  small  or  great 
the  length  of  the  wire  may  be ;  and  though  by  its  tortuous  course 
it  may  pass  out  of  one  plane  into  another  on  its  way  to  the  equator. 

3101.  Further,  if  such  a  wire  as  that  last  described  be  revolved 
once  round  the  end  of  the  magnet  to  which  it  is  related,  a  slip- 
ping contact  at  the  equator  being  permitted  for  the  purpose,  it 
will  intersect  all  the  lines  of  force  during  the  revolution ;  and 
that,  whether  the  polar  contact  is  absolutely  coincident  with  the 
magnetic  axis,  or  is  anywhere  else  at  the  end  of  the  bar,  provided 
it  remain  for  the  time  unchanged.  All  this  is  true,  though  the 
magnet  may  be  subject,  by  induction  at  a  distance,  to  other 
magnets  or  bodies,  and  may  be  exerting  part  of  its  force  on  them, 
so  as  to  make  the  distribution  of  its  power  very  irregular  as 
compared  to  the  case  of  the  independent  bar  (3084.),  or  may 
have  an  irregular  or  contorted  shape,  even  up  to  the  horseshoe 
form.  It  is  evident,  indeed,  that  if  a  wire  have  one  of  its  ends 
applied  to  any  point  on  the  surface  of  a  magnet,  and  the  other 


342  On  lines  oj  magnetic  force.    [Series  XXVIII. 

end  to  a  point  in  the  magnetic  equator,  and  the  latter  be  slipped 
once  round  the  magnetic  equator,  and  the  loop  of  wire  be 
made  to  pass  over  either  pole,  so  as  at  last  to  resume  its  first 
position,  it  will  in  the  course  of  its  journey  have  intersected  once 
every  line  of  force  belonging  to  the  magnet. 

3102  A  wire  from  pole  to  pole  which  passes  close  to  the 
equator,  of  course  intersects  half  the  external  lines  of  force  m  a 
great  plane,  twice,  in  opposite  directions  as  regards  the  polarity  ; 
and,  therefore,  when  revolved  round  the  magnet,  has  no  electric 
current  induced  in  it.    If  it  do  not  touch  at  the  equator,  still, 
whatever  Hnes  it  intersects,  are  twice  intersected,  and  so  the  same 
equilibrium  is  preserved.    If  the  magnet  rotate  under  the  ^^^lre, 
it  acts  the  part  of  the  central  rotating  wire  already  referred  to 
(3095.) ;  or  if  any  course  for  the  electric  current  other  than  a 
right  line  is  assumed  in  it,  that  course  is  subject  to  the  law  of 
neutraUty  above  stated,  as  will  be  seen  by  reference  to  the  in- 
ternal condition  of  the  magnet  itself  (3117.).    Hence  the  reason 
why  no  currents  are  produced,  under  any  circumstances  of  motion 
by  the  application  of  such  conducting  circuits  to  the  magnet.  I 
may  further  observe,  in  reference  to  the  intersection  of  he  lines 
offeree,  that  if  a  wire  ring,  a  little  larger  in  diameter  han  the 
magnet  be  held  edgeways  at  one  of  the  poles,  so  that  the  lines 
of  force  there  shall  be  in  its  plane,  and  be  then  turned  90  and 
carried  over  the  pole  to  the  equator  (3088.),  it  will  intersec 
once  all  the  Unes  of  the  magnet,  except  the  very  few  which  ^  iM 
remain  unintersected  at  the  equator. 

3103  Whilst  endeavouring  to  estabhsh  experimentally  the 
definite  amount  of  the  power  represented  by  the  lines  of  force 
it  is  necessary  to  take  certain  precautions,  or  the  results  will  be 
in  error.    For  instance,  ten  revolutions  of  the  wire  abou  the 
magnet,  or  of  the  magnet  within  the  fixed  wire  (3O970,  oug^j^J 
give  a  constant  deflection  at  the  galvanometer,  and  yet  ^^thou 
!ny  change  in  the  position  of  the  wire  the  results  may  at  ditf^-^.t 
Ws  differ  very  much  from  each  other;  being  at  one  time  9  , 
anTat  another  only  4°  or  5°.  I  found  this  to  be  due  to  difference 
orvelocity  within  certain  limits,  and  to  be  explained  and  guarded 

X  move  across  lines  of  force  slowly,  a  feeble 
electric  current  is  produced  in  it,  continuing  for  the  time  of  the 
motion  ;  if  it  move  across  the  same  lines  quickly,  a  strongei 


Oct.  1851.]      Precautions  as  to  time — velocity.  343 

current  is  produced  for  a  shorter  time.  The  effect  of  the  current 
which  deflects  a  galvanometer  needle,  is  opposed  by  the  action 
of  the  earth,  which  tends  to  return  the  needle  to  zero.  A  con- 
tinuous weak  current,  therefore,  cannot  deflect  it  so  far  as  a 
continuous  stronger  current.  If  the  currents  be  limited  in  dura- 
tion, the  same  eflPect  will  occur  unless  the  time  of  the  swing  of 
the  needle  to  one  side  be  not  considerably  more  than  the  time 
of  either  of  the  currents.  If  the  time  of  the  needle-swing  be  ten, 
and  the  time  of  ten  quick  rotations  be  six,  then  all  the  effect  of 
the  induced  current  is  exerted  in  swinging  the  needle ;  but  if 
the  time  of  ten  slow  rotations  be  twelve  or  fifteen,  then  part  of 
the  current  produced  is  not  recognized  by  the  extent  of  the 
vibration,  but  only  by  its  holding  the  needle  out  awhile,  at  the 
extremity  of  a  smaller  arc  of  declination.  Therefore,  when  quick 
and  slow  velocity  was  compared,  and,  indeed,  in  every  case  of 
comparative  rotations  of  the  wire  and  magnet,  only  that  number 
of  rotations  was  taken  which  could  be  well  included  within  the 
time  of  the  needle's  journey  to  one  side ; — when  the  needle,  there- 
fore, was  seen  to  travel  on  to  its  extreme  distance  after  the  rota- 
tion and  the  inducing  current  had  ceased.  If  the  needle  began  to 
return  the  instant  the  motion  was  over,  such  an  experiment  was 
rejected  for  purposes  of  comparison.  When  these  precautions 
were  attended  to,  and  velocities  of  revolution  taken,  which  occu- 
pied times  from  one-third  to  three-fourths  of  that  required  for 
the  swing  of  the  needle,  then  the  same  number  of  revolutions 
(ten)  gave  the  same  amount  of  deflection,  namely,  9°"5,  with  my 
apparatus,  though  the  time  of  revolution  varied  as  1  :  2,  or  even 
in  a  higher  degree. 

3105.  Another  cause  of  difference  produced  by  varying  velo- 
city, is  the  diminution  of  the  action  of  the  current  on  the  needle, 
as  the  angle  which  the  latter  forms  with  the  convolutions  of  the 
coil  increases.  Hence  a  constant  current  produces  more  effect 
on  the  deflection  of  the  needle  for  the  first  moments  of  time  than 
afterwards.  This  eflfect,  however,  was  scarcely  sensible  for 
swinging  deflections  of  9°  or  10°,  produced  by  currents  which 
were  over  before  the  needle  had  moved  through  4°  or  5°. 

3106.  It  has  already  been  shown,  that  it  is  a  matter  of  indif- 
ference whether  the  wire  revolve  in  one  direction  or  the  magnet 
in  the  other  (3091 .) ;  and  this  is  still  further  proved  by  the  cases 
where  the  magnet  and  the  wire  revolve  together  (3092.) ;  for  then 


344  On  lines  of  magnetic  force    [Series  XXVIIT. 

the  currents  which  tend  to  form  are  exactly  equal  and  opposed 
to  each  other,  whatever  the  position  of  the  wire  may  be.  As 
the  immobihty  of  the  needle  is  a  point  more  easily  ascertamed  f 
than  the  extent  of  an  arc,  indicated  only  for  a  moment,  and  as 
the  rotations  of  the  magnet  and  wire  conjointly  can  be  made 
rapid  and  continuous,  the  proof  in  such  cases  is  very  satisfactory. 

.3107.  Proceeding  to  experiment  upon  the  effect  of  the  distance 
of  the  wire  c,  fig.  U,  from  the  ^ 
magnet,  the  wire  was  made  to  'S- 

vary,  so  that  sometimes  it  was  not    /"^  '~  ..^ 

more  than  8  inches  long  (being  of 
copper  and  0*04  of  an  inch  in  dia- 
meter), and  only  half  an  inch  from 
the  magnet,  whilst  at  other  times 

it  was  6  or  8  feet  long  and  extended  to  a  great  distance.  The 
deflection  due  to  ten  revolutions  of  the  magnet  was  observed,  and 
the  average  of  several  observations,  for  each  position  of  the  wire, 
taken:  these  were  very  close  (with  the  precautions  befa^  de- 
scribed) for  the  same  position;  and  the  averages  for  different 
positions  agreed  perfectly  together,  being  9°-5.^  \T^~fl 
to  repeat  these  experiments  on  distance  by  moving  the  wire  and 
preserving  the  magnet  stationary  in  the  manner  before  described 
f309lT-  they  were  not  so  striking  because  time  would  only  allow 
if  fmaUer  deflections  being  obtained  (3104.)  but  the  same  n- 
ber  of  journeys  through  an  arc  of  180°  gave  the  same  deflection 
at  the  galvanometer,  Whether  the  course  of  the  w~^^^^^^ 
the  magnet  or  far  off;  and  the  deflection  agreed  with  those  ob 
tained  when  the  magnet  was  rotating  and  the  ^^ll  ^l'^^ 

3108.  As  to  velocity  of  motion  ;  when  the  magnet  was  lotating 
and  th  wire  placed  at  different  then  ten  revolutions 

nhe  magnet  p'roduced  the  same  deflection  of  the -dl^^^^^^^^^ 
the  motion  was  quicker  or  slower,  and  whatever  the  distance  o 
the  wire  provided  the  precautions  before  described  were  attended 
to  (3104  )  That  the  sLe  would  be  true  if  the  wire  were  moving 
and  he  m^net  still,  is  shown  by  this  ;  that  whatever  the  velo- 
eS  wi  h  which  the  ;ire  and  -agnet  revolve  together,  and  what^ 
ever  their  distance  apart,  they  exactly  neutralize  and  equal  each 

'tlofFrom  these  results  the  following  conclusions  may  be 
drawn     The  amount  of  magnetic  force,  as  shown  by  its  effect  in 


Oct.  1851.]        occurring  in  air— conclusions. 


345 


evolving  electric  currents,  is  determinate  for  the  same  lines  of 
force,  whatever  the  distance  of  the  point  or  plane,  at  which  their 
power  is  exerted,  is  from  the  magnet.  Or  it  is  the  same  in  any 
two,  or  more,  sections  of  the  same  lines  of  force,  whatever  their 
form  or  their  distance  from  the  seat  of  the  power  may  be.  This 
is  shown  by  the  results  with  the  magnet  and  the  wire,  when 
both  are  in  the  circuit  (3108.)  ;  and  also  by  the  wire  loop  revol- 
ving with  the  magnet  (3092.) ;  where  the  tendency  of  currents 
to  form  in  the  two  parts  oppose  and  exactly  neutralize  or  com- 
pensate each  other. 

3110.  In  the  latter  case  very  varying  sections  outside  of  the 
magnet  may  be  compared  to  each  other  ;  thus,  the  wire  may  be 
conceived  of  as  passing  (or  be  actually  formed  so  as  to  intersect) 
lines  of  force  near  the  pole,  and  then,  being  continued  along  a 
line  of  force  until  over  the  equator,  may  be  directed  so  as  to 
intersect  the  same  lines  of  force  in  the  contrary  direction,  and 
then  return  along  a  line  of  force  to  its  commencement ;  and  so 
two  surface  sections  may  be  compared.  It  is  manifest  that  every 
loop  forming  a  complete  circuit,  which  is  in  a  great  plane  passing 
through  the  axis  of  the  magnet,  must  have  precisely  the  same 
lines  of  force  passing  into  and  passing  out  of  it,  though  they  may, 
so  to  say,  be  expanded  in  one  part  and  compressed  in  another ; 
or  (speaking  in  the  language  of  radiation)  be  more  intense  in  one 
part  and  less  intense  in  the  other.  It  is  also  as  manifest,  that, 
if  the  loop  be  not  in  one  plane,  still,  on  making  one  complete 
revolution,  either  with  or  without  the  magnet,  it  will  have  inter- 
sected in  its  two  opposite  parts  an  exactly  equal  amount  of  lines 
of  force.  Hence  the  comparison  of  any  one  section  of  a  given 
amount  of  lines  of  force  with  any  other  section  is  rendered, 
experimentally,  very  extensive. 

3111 .  Such  results  prove,  that,  under  the  circumstances,  there 
is  no  loss,  or  destruction,  or  evanescence,  or  latent  state  of  the 
magnetic  power  by  distance. 

3112.  Also  that  convergence  or  divergence  of  the  lines  of  force 
causes  no  difference  in  their  amount. 

3113.  That  bbhquity  of  intersection  causes  no  difference.  It 
is  easy  so  to  shape  the  loop  (3110.),  that  it  shall  intersect  the 
lines  of  force  directly  across  at  both  places  of  intersection,  or 
directly  at  one  and  obliquely  at  the  other,  or  obliquely  in  any 
degree  at  both ;  and  yet  the  result  is  always  the  same  (3093.). 


346 


On  lines  of  magnetic  force    [Series  XXVIII. 


3114.  It  is  also  evident,  by  the  results  of  the  rotation  of  the  wire 
and  magnet  (3097.  3106.),  that  when  a  wire  is  moving  amongst 
equal  lines  (or  in  a  field  of  equal  magnetic  force),  and  with  an 
uniform  motion,  then  the  current  of  electricity  produced  is  pro- 
portionate to  the  time ;  and  also  to  the  velocity  of  motion. 

3115.  They  also  prove,  generally,  that  the  quantity  of  elec- 
tricity thrown  into  a  current  is  directly  as  the  amount  of  curves 
intersected. 


3116.  In  addition  to  these  results,  this  method  of  investiga- 
tion gives  much  insight  into  the  internal  condition  of  the  magnet, 
and  the  manner  in  which  the  lines  of  force  (which  represent 
truly  all  that  we  are  acquainted  with  of  the  peculiar  action  of  the 
magnet)  either  terminate  at  its  exterior,  or  at  any  assumed  points, 
to  be  called  poles ;  or  are  continued  and  disposed  of  within.  For 
this  purpose,  let  us  consider  the  external  loop  (3093.)  of  fig.  5. 
When  revolving  with  the  magnet  no  current  is  produced,  because 
the  lines  of  force  which  are  intersected  on  the  one  part,  are  again 
intersected  in  an  opposing  direction  on  the  other  (3110.).   But  if 
one  part  of  the  loop  be  taken  down  the  axis  of  the  magnet,  and 
the  wire  then  pass  out  at  the  equator  (3091.),  still  the  same 
absence  of  effect  is  produced  ;  and  yet  it  is  evident  that,  external 
to  the  magnet,  every  part  of  the  wire  passes  through  lines  of 
force,  which  conspire  together  to  produce  a  current ;  for  all  the 
external  lines  of  force  are  then  intersected  by  that  wire  in  one 
revolution  (3101.).    We  must  therefore  look  to  the  part  of  the 
wire  within  the  magnet,  for  a  power  equal  to  that  capable  of 
being  exerted  externally,  and  we  find  it  in  that  small  portion 
which  represents  a  radius  at  the  central  and  equatorial  parts. 
When,  in  fact,  the  axial  part  of  the  wire  was  rotated  it  produced 
no  effect  (3095.) ;  when  the  axial,  the  inner  radial,  and  the  ex- 
ternal parts  were  revolved  together,  they  produced  no  effect ; 
when  the  external  wire  alone  was  revolved,  directly,  it  produced 
a  current  (3091.);  and  when  the  internal  radius  wire  alone 
(being  insulated  from  the  magnet)  revolved,  directly,  it  also  pro- 
duced a  current  (3095.  3098.)  in  the  contrary  direction  to  the 
former;  and  the  two  were  exactly  equal  in  power;  for  when 
both  portions  of  the  wire  moved  together  directly,  they  perfectly 
compensated  each  other  (3095.).    This  radius  wire  may  be  re- 
placed by  the  magnet  itself  (3096.  3118.). 


Oct.  1851.]         occwning  tvithin  a  magnet. 


347 


3117.  So,  by  this  test  there  exists  lines  of  force  within  the 
mao-net.  of  the  same  nature  as  those  without.  What  is  more, 
they  are  exactly  equal  in  amount  to  those  without.  They  have 
a  relation  in  direction  to  those  without ;  and  in  fact  are  continua- 
tions of  them,  absolutely  unchanged  in  their  nature,  so  far  as 
the  experimental  test  can  be  applied  to  them.  Every  line  of 
force  therefoi'e,  at  whatever  distance  it  may  be  taken  from  the 
magnet,  must  be  considered  as  a  closed  circuit,  passing  in  some 
part  of  its  course  through  the  magnet,  and  having  an  equal 
amount  of  force  in  every  part  of  its  course. 

3118.  When  the  axial  part  of  the  wire  is  dismissed  and  the 
magnet  employed  in  its  place,  so  as  to  be  included  in  the  circuit, 
it  is  easy  to  see  how  it  acts  the  part  of  the  conductor.  For 
suppose  the  wire  itself  to  be  continued  from  N  to  b,  fig.  12,  by 
any  of  the  three  paths  indicated  by  pjg 

dotted  hues, the  effectis the  samein 


all  the  cases,  both  by  experiment 
(3093.)  and  by  principle  (3100.). 
For  whatever  the  form  of  the  path. 


it  will  in  one  revolution  intersect 

the  same  amount  of  lines  of  force  within  the  magnet,  as  are 
intersected  in  the  contrary  direction  by  the  part  of  the  wire 
outside  the  magnet ;  and  when  the  magnet  is  employed  to  com- 
plete the  circuit  in  place  of  the  internal  wire,  then  its  substance 
produces  precisely  the  same  result ;  for  direction  and  every  other 
circumstance  which  influences  the  result  remains  the  same :  one 
conductor  has  simply  been  substituted  for  another.  The  great 
mass  of  the  magnet  might  be  supposed  able  to  do  something 
more  than  the  thin  wire,  but  the  reason  why  it  only  equals  it  in 
effect  will  be  seen  hereafter  (3137.)  And  as  the  axial  wire,  in 
revolving,  does  nothing  but  conduct  (3095.),  all  the  effect 
being  produced  by  that  part  which  represents  a  radius  be- 
tween the  axis  and  the  equator  (3098.) ;  so  the  magnet,  re- 
revolving  as  a  cylinder,  is  as  to  its  mass  like  the  revolving  wire ; 
with  the  exception  of  so  much  of  it  as  represents  a  radius  con- 
necting together  the  two  points  at  the  pole  or  axis  and  at  the 
equator,  where  communication  with  the  wire  is  completed.  As 
was  shown  long  ago  (220.),  if  a  cylinder  magnet  be  revolved, 
and  the  ends  of  the  galvanometer  wires  a  c  be  applied  to  the 
extremities  of  its  axis,  no  current  is  evolved ;  but  if  a  be  applied 


348 


On  lines  of  magnetic  force,    [Series  XXVIII. 


to  one  end,  it  matters  not  which,  and  c  be  apphed  at  the  equator 
or  any  other  part  on  the  surface  of  the  cyUnder,  a  current  always 
in  the  same  direction  for  the  same  rotation  will  be  produced. 

3119.  Further  to  prove  these  points,  the  magnets  were  cut  in 
half  through  the  equatorial  plane,  and  then,  either  a  disc  of 
copper  placed  there,  or  a  wire  radius  only,  or  the  magnets 
brought  together  again  :  and  these  three  arrangements  were  used 
in  succession  to  complete  the  circuit  from  the  axial  wire  (3095.) 
to  a  fixed  wire  at  the  surface  of  the  equator.  Whichever  was 
employed  the  current  produced  was  the  same,  both  in  direction 
and  amount.  If  the  cyhnder  magnet  above  described  (3118.) 
be  terminated  at  the  ends  by  attached  discs  of  silver  or  copper, 
the  wires  appUed  to  their  surfaces,  as  they  revolve  with  the 
magnet,  produce  precisely  the  same  currents  as  to  direction  as 
if  applied  to  the  surface  of  the  magnet  itself  (218.  219.). 

3120.  In  this  striking  disposition  of  the  forces  of  a  magnet, 
as  exhibited  by  the  moving  wire,  it  exactly  resembles  an  electro- 
magnetic helix,  both  as  to  the  direction  of  the  Unes  of  force  in 
closed  circuits,  and  in  their  equal  sum  within  and  without.  No 
doubt,  the  magnet  is  the  most  heterogeneous  in  its  nature,  being 
composed,  as  we  are  well-aware,  of  parts  which  differ  much  in 
the  degree  of  their  magnetic  development ;  so  much  so,  that  some 
of  the  internal  portions  appear  frequently  to  act  as  keepers  or 
submagnets  to  the  parts  which  are  further  from  the  centre,  and 
so,  for  the  time,  to  form  complete  circuits,  or  something  equiva- 
lent to  them,  within.  But  these  make  no  part  of  the  resultant 
of  force  externally,  and  it  is  only  that  resultant  which  is  sensible 
to  us  in  any  way ;  either  by  the  action  on  a  needle,  or  other 
magnets,  or  soft  iron,  or  the  moving  wire.  So  also  the  power 
which  is  manifest  within  the  magnet  by  its  effect  on  the  moving 
mass,  is  still  only  that  same  resultant ;  being  equal  to,  and  by 
polarity  and  other  quaUties,  identical  with  it.  No  doubt,  there 
are  cases,  as  upon  the  approach  of  a  keeper  to  the  poles,  or  the 
approximation  of  other  magnets,  either  in  favourable  or  adverse 
positions,  when  more  external  force  is  developed,  or  it  may  be  a 
portion  apparently  thrown  inwards  and  so  the  external  force 
diminished.  But  in  these  cases,  that  which  remains  externally 
existent,  corresponds  precisely  to  that  which  is  the  resultant 
internally ;  for  when  either  the  same,  or  contraiy  poles,  of  a 
powerful  horseshoe  magnet  were  placed  within  an  inch  and  a 


Oct.  1851.]  their  definite  character. 


349 


half  of  che  poles  of  the  bar-magncts,  prepared  to  rotate  with  the 
attached  wu-es  (3092.),  as  before  described,  still,  upon  their  revo- 
lution, not  the  slightest  action  at  the  galvanometer  was  perceived ; 
the  forces  within  the  magnet  and  those  without  perfectly  com- 
pensating each  other. 

3121.  The  definite  character  of  the  forces  of  an  invariable 
magnet,  at  whatever  distance  they  are  observed  from  the  magnet, 
has  been  already  insisted  upon  (3109.).  How  much  more  stri- 
kingly does  that  point  come  forth  now,  that,  being  able  to  observe 
within  the  magnet,  we  find  the  same  definite  character  there ; 
every  section  of  the  forces,  whether  within  or  without  the  magnet, 
being  exactly  of  the  same  amount !  The  power  of  a  magnet  may 
therefore  be  easily  represented  by  the  effects  of  any  section  of 
its  Hues  of  force ;  and  as  the  currents  induced  by  two  different 
magnets  may  easily  be  conducted  through  one  wire,  or  be,  in 
other  ways,  compared  to  each  other,  so  facilities  may  thus  arise 
for  the  establishment  of  a  standard  amongst  magnets. 

3122.  On  the  other  hand,  the  use  of  the  idea  of  lines  of  force, 
which  I  recommend,  to  represent  the  true  and  real  magnetic 
forces,  makes  it  very  desirable  that  we  should  find  a  unit  of  such 
force,  if  it  can  be  attainable,  by  any  experimental  arrangement, 
just  as  one  desires  to  have  a  unit  for  rays  of  light  or  heat.  It 
does  not  seem  to  me  improbable  that  further  research  will  supply 
the  means  of  establishing  a  standard  of  this  kind.  In  the  mean 
time,  for  the  enlargement  of  the  utility  of  the  idea  in  relation  to 
the  magnetic  force,  and  to  indicate  its  conditions  graphically, 
lines  may  be  employed  as  representing  these  units  in  any  given 
case.  I  have  so  employed  them  in  former  series  of  these  Re- 
searches (2807.  2821.  2831.  2874.  &c.),  where  the  direction  of 
the  line  of  force  is  shown  at  once,  and  the  relative  amount  of 
force,  or  of  lines  of  force  in  a  given  space,  indicated  by  their 
concentration  or  separation,  i.  e.  by  their  number  in  that  space. 
Such  a  use  of  unit  lines  involves,  I  believe,  no  error  either  in 
the  direction  of  the  polarity  or  in  the  amount  of  force  indicated 
at  any  given  spot  included  in  the  diagrams. 

3123.  The  currents  produced  in  wires,  when  they  cross  lines 
of  magnetic  force,  are  so  feeble  in  intensity  (though  abundant 
enough  in  quantity,  as  many  results  show),  that  a  fine  wire 
galvanometer  must  of  necessity  offer  great  obstruction  to  their 
passage.    Therefore,  before  entering  upon  further  experimental 


350 


On  lines  of  magnetic  force.    [Series  XXVIII. 


Fig.  13. 


1 


Fig.  14. 


inquiries,  I  had  another  galvanometer  constructed,  in  which  the 
needles  belonging  to  that  made  by  Rhumkorff  were  employed, 
but  the  coil  was  replaced  by  a  single  convolution  of  very  stout 
wire.    The  wire  was  of  copper,  0*2  of  an  inch  in  diameter.  It 
passed  horizontally  under  the  lower  needle,  then,  as  nearly  as 
might  be,  between  that  and  the  upper  needle,  over  the  upper,  and 
then  again  between  that  and  the  lower  needle,  fig.  13,  and  was 
afterwards  attached  to  the  stand,  and 
continued  for  19  or  20  feet  outside  of 
the  glass  cover.    Such  a  wire  had 
abundant    conducting   power;  and 
though  it  passed  but  once  round  each 
needle,  gave  a  deflection  many  times 
greater  than  that  belonging  to  the  for- 
mer galvanometer.     Thus  when  the 
ends  of  the  nineteen  feet  of  wire  were 
soldered  together,  so  as  to  form  one 
loop  or  circuit,  the  passage  of  the  wire  once 
between  the  poles  of  a  horseshoe  magnet  (3124.), 
caused  a  deflection,  or  rather  swing  of  the 
needle  of  above  90°.    I  have  had  a  more  per- 
fect instrument,  of  the  same  kind,  constructed, 
in  which  the  conducting  coil  was  cut  out  of 
plates  of  copper,  so  as  to  form  a  square  band 
0-2  of  an  inch  in  thickness,  which  passed  twice 
round  the  vibration  plane  of  each  needle,  as 
represented,  fig.  14.     The  length  of  metal 
around  the  needles  was  24  inches,  and  the  galvanometer  was 
very  sensitive,  but  the  experiments  to  be  described  were  made 
chiefly  with  the  former  instrument. 

3124.  It  was  necessary,  first,  to  ascertain  the  effect  of  certain 
circumstances  upon  this  simple  galvanometer,  as  to  their  modi- 
fication of  its  indications.    The  magnet  to  be  used  was  a  com- 
pound horseshoe  instrument,  weigh- 
ing 16  lbs.,  and  able  to  support  40  lbs.  Fig.  15. 
by  the  keeper  or  submagnet.     It  is 
some  years  since  it  was  magnetized, 
and  it  is  therefore,  probably,  in  a 
nearly  constant  state  as  to  power. 
The  poles  have  the  form  deUneated, 

fig.  15.    Their  distance  apart  is  1-375  inch,  and  the  distance 


Oct.  1851.]    Thick  loire  galvanometer— precautions.  351 

downwards,  from  their  summit  to  the  bottom  or  equator  of  the 
magnet,  is  8-5  inches.  The  galvanometer  stood  in  the  prolonga- 
tion of  the  magnetic  axis,  i.  e.  the  line  from  pole  to  pole,  and 
whether  it  were  6  or  only  3  feet  distant,  was  hardly  at  all  affected 
in  the  time  of  its  vibration,  being  adjusted  so  nearly  astatic  as 
to  require  about  ten  seconds  to  swing  to  the  right  or  to  the  left. 

3125.  On  passing  the  wire  across  the  magnetic  field,  as  just 
described  (3123.),  but  with  different  velocities,  effects  different 
in  degree  were  obtained  at  the  galvanometer,  for  the  reasons 
formerly  given  (3104.  3106.).  The  quickest  velocity  gave  the 
greatest  result,  equal  at  times  to  140°,  whilst  a  very  slow  motion 
gave  only  30°  or  40°.  Still  with  moderately  quick  velocities  the 
effects  were  nearly  alike,  and  by  operating  with  the  same  velo- 
city, and  taking  the  average  of  several  observations,  a  very  uniform 
result  could  be  obtained. 

3126.  On  cutting  the  wire  across,  and  then  putting  the  ends 
together  in  various  ways,  it  was  found  that  great  care  was  requi- 
site in  making  contact,  in  this  or  in  similar  cases.  Thus,  to 
press  the  ends  lightly  together  was  not  sufficient;  they  re- 
quired to  be  well  and  recently  cleaned  and  pressed  closely  into 
contact.  Junctions  effected  by  soldering  or  dipping  into  cups 
of  mercury  were  still  better,  when  made  with  care,  and  were 
employed  at  the  galvanometer  and  elsewhere  as  often  as  possible. 

3127.  To  ascertain  generally  the  obstruction  caused  by  the 
interposition  of  thin  wires,  28  inches  of  copper  wire,  0*045  of  an 
inch  in  diameter,  was  introduced  into  the  circuit  at  a  part  away 
from  the  magnet,  with  excellent  junctions.  The  oscillation  or 
swing,  which  before  was  140°  or  more,  was  now  reduced  to  40°. 
On  taking  out  the  wire  and  replacing  it  by  another,  also  of  copper, 
but  only  19*5  inches  in  length,  and  0*0135  in  diameter,  the  de- 
flection was  reduced  to  7°  or  8°. 

3128.  For  a  rough  comparison  of  the  power  of  this  magnet 
and  the  former  bar  magnets  (3085.),  by  the  present  galvanometer, 
the  thick  wire  was  bent  into  a  loop  (3086.),  and  the  two  bar 
magnets,  with  like  ends  together,  passed  quickly  through  it  up 
to  the  equatorial  part ;  the  deflection  was  about  30°.  Such  a 
passage  intersected  nearly  all  the  lines  of  force  of  the  bar  mag- 
nets. A  similar  motion  of  the  magnets  close  to,  but  outside  of, 
the  loop,  produced  no  effect  at  the  galvanometer. 

3129.  In  respect  of  the  alteration  of  the  lines  of  force,  either 


352 


On  lines  of  magnetic  force.    [Series  XXVIII. 


in  position  or  in  total  amount,  by  bringing  the  poles  of  the 
horseshoe  magnet  (3124.)  much  nearer  together,  the  following 
experiments  were  made.  The  distance  between  the  poles  is 
1*375  inch ;  by  placing  a  cube  of  soft  iron,  0*8  of  an  inch  in  the 
side,  within  this  space,  it  was  diminished  to  0*575,  and  thus, 
virtually,  the  distance  apart  much  lessened,  and,  as  was  afterwards 
shown  experimentally  (3130.),  the  external  power  of  the  magnet 
concentrated  there.  Then,  whilst  the  cube  was  in  place,  the 
thick  wire  of  0*2  of  an  inch  in  diameter,  was  arranged  so  as  to 
pass  across  the  magnetic  axis  or  place  of  strongest  action,  and 
fixed ;  after  which  the  iron  cube  was  alternately  removed  and 
again  restored,  and  the  effects  observed.  Feeble  electric  currents 
were  produced  at  these  times ;  but  whether  the  cube  was  put 
into  its  place  from  below,  or  above  or  the  sides,  the  current  pro- 
duced was  always  in  the  same  direction  ;  and  when  it  was  re- 
moved the  current  produced  was  in  the  reverse  direction.  If 
the  cube  were  carried  up  to,  by,  and  away  from,  the  magnetic 
axis  in  one  motion,  then  there  was  no  effect  at  the  galvanometer. 
On  the  other  hand,  when  the  wire  was  carried  across  the  mag- 
netic field  as  described  (3123.),  so  as  to  intersect  all  the  lines  of 
force  in  one  movement,  and  sum  up  their  power  at  the  galvano- 
meter, then  there  was  no  difference  in  the  result,  whether  the 
iron  cube  was  in  its  place  or  not ;  showing,  as  far  as  this  appa- 
ratus could  indicate,  that  the  sum  of  power  in  the  section  of  all 
the  lines  of  force  external  to  the  magnet,  was  the  same  under 
both  circumstances,  though  the  distribution  of  it  was  different. 

3130.  The  very  action  produced  by  the  cube,  when  in  and 
out  of  place  (3129.),  upon  the  forces  which  affected  the  stationary 
wire,  was  a  proof  of  the  difference  of  distribution  at  different 
times. 

3131.  A  block  of  bismuth,  employed  in  place  of  the  iron  cube^ 
had  no  sensible  effect  upon  the  wire  whether  it  were  still  or 
moving. 

3 132.  This  galvanometer  was  first  employed  for  a  repetition 
of  all  the  former  experiments  with  the  bar  magnets  (3091.  &c.). 
The  results  were  absolutely  the  same,  except  that  the  amount  of 
the  deviation  produced,  when  deviation  w^as  a  result,  was  larger 
than  in  the  former  cases. 

3133.  For  the  comparison  of  different  thicknesses  of  the  same 


Oct.  1851.]    Moving  loires — different  thicknesses. 


353 


metal,  I  took  copper  wires  in  lengths  of  10-5  inches,  and  different 
diameters,  and  bending  them  into  loops  of  a  form  and  size  such 
as  would  admit  them  to  pass  with  facihty  over  a  pole  of  the 
horseshoe  magnet,  soldered  them  to  the  ends  of  two  conducting 
rods,  made  of  copper  wire  0-2  of  an  inch  in  diameter  and  35 
inches  in  length  each,  which  were  fixed  on  opposite  sides  of  a 
narrow  slip  of  wood.  The  whole  arrangement  is  seen  in  fig.  16; 


Fig.  16. 


the  terminations  a  b  dip  into  the  mercurial  cups  of  the  galvano- 
meter, the  parts  at  c  are  brought  so  close  together  as  to  touch, 
except  for  the  intervention  of  a  piece  of  card,  and  thus  the  parts 
from  do  ab  are  thrown  out  of  action,  except  as  mere  conductors^ 
whilst  the  loop,  being  made  to  descend  over  one  magnetic  pole, 
intersects  very  nearly  the  whole  of  the  magnetic  curves,  and 
always  the  same  proportion. 

3134.  The  former  magnet  was  too  powerful  for  comparative 
experiments,  therefore  a  smaller  one  was  employed,  consisting 
of  five  plates,  M'eighing  8  lbs.,  and  able  to  carry  21  lbs.  easily  at 
the  keeper.  The  poles  were  1*2  inch  apart  and  an  inch  thick 
each,  in  the  direction  of  the  magnetic  axis.  If  less  magnetic 
power  were  required,  an  adjustment  was  easily  made,  by  apply- 
ing the  keeper  to  the  side  upon  both  limbs,  the  magnetic  com- 
munication being  effected  either  nearer  to  the  poles,  or  nearer 
to  the  equator  or  bend,  as  less  or  more  power  was  required. 
The  descent  of  the  loop  between  the  poles  is  then  best  regulated 
by  causing  the  conductor  wires  to  bear  ultimately  against  a 
stopping- block. 

3135.  The  effect  of  a  quick  and  a  slow  motion  was  found  to 
be  the  same  as  before  (3104.  3105.).  Such  velocities  as  the  hand 
could  impart  were  very  effectual,  and  gave  results  of  very  con- 
siderable uniformity  when  quick  motions  were  employed. 

3136.  Thi'ee  different  loops  were  compared  together,  consisting 
of  copper  wire,  the  diameters  of  which  were  0*2,  O'l  and  0-05  of 
an  inch,  or  as  4,  2  and  1  ;  their  sectional  areas  or  masses  there- 
fore were  as  16,  4  and  1.  Ten  or  twelve  obsei'vations  were  made 
with  each  loop  ;  the  results  were  near  together,  and  the  average 

vo  L.  in.  2  A 


354 


Lines  of  magnetic  force.    [Series  XXVIII. 


for  each  loop,  being  the  extent  of  the  swing  declination  on  one 
side  from  zero,  is  as  follows : — 

Copper  wire  of  ^V^b  of  an  inch  in  thickness  .  .  IG'OO 
CojDper  wire  of  y o^h  of  an  inch  in  thickness  .  .  44*40 
Copper  wire  of  J-th  of  an  inch  in  thickness  .    .    .  57'37 

Now  though  the  thicker  wires  produced  tbe  largest  effect,  the 
results  were  evidently  not  at  all  in  proportion  to  the  masses  of 
the  wires ;  the  smaller  having  greatl}'^  the  advantage  in  that 
respect.  On  the  other  hand,  when  four  of  the  smaller  wires 
were  placed  side  by  side,  so  as  to  form  one  loop  equal  in  mass 
to  the  second  loop,  it  gave  the  same  result  as  that  loop,  being  of 
the  same  power. 

3137.  The  disproportion  of  the  difference  of  these  three  wires 
is  evidently  a  consequence  of  the  relative  difference  of  the  mere 
conducting  part  of  the  circuit.  To  compare  accurately  the 
effect  of  the  lines  of  force  on  wires  of  different  diameters  moving 
across  them,  these  diameters  should  continue  to,  and  through 
the  galvanometer  (205.),  otherwise  the  thin  wire  current  has  an 
advantage  given  to  it  in  the  conducting  part,  which  the  thick 
wire  current  has  not.  Hence  the  reason  why  a  thin  wire  galva- 
nometer, such  as  that  before  described  (3086.),  gives  results 
which  are  alike,  for  thick  or  thin  wire  loops,  or  for  fasciculi  of 
few  or  many  wires.  To  enlarge  the  comparison,  I  soldered  on 
to  two  pairs  of  conductors,  the  dimensions  of  those  described 
(3133,),  two  cylinders  of  copper,  each  5*5  inches  long,  but  one 
was  only  0*2  of  an  inch  thick  and  the  other  0'7j  or  twelve  times 
the  mass  of  the  first,  fig.  17-    They  were  then  passed  in  suc- 


Fig.  17. 


cession  between  the  poles  of  the  magnet,  and  gave  results  very 
nearly  alike.  If  there  was  any  difference,  the  effect  was  highest 
with  the  smallest  cylinder ;  and  this  may  very  well  be  ;  for  as  the 
magnetic  field  was  not  equal  in  force,  but  most  intense  in  the 
magnetic  axis,  so  it  is  evident,  that  whilst  one  part  of  the  large 
cylinder,  in  passing  across,  was  at  the  axis,  other  parts  were  in 
places  of  less  intense  force  and  action,  and  so  a  return  current 


Oct.  1851.]    Moving  loires — different  diameters. 


355 


may  have  existed  in  fhem,  which  could  not  occur  to  the  same 
extent  in  a  cyhnder  little  more  than  a  fourth  of  the  diameter  of 
the  former,  and  which,  at  the  same  time,  had  an  outlet  for  the 
currents  equal  to  its  own  diameter,  through  the  conducting  wires. 
A  similar  relation  of  mass  occurs  in  the  case  where  the  body  of 
the  magnet  itself  in  revolving,  does  no  more  than  a  small  radial 
wire  within  it  (3118.). 

3138.  The  influence  of  this  lateral  conduction  (3137.),  in  cases 
of  magneto-electric  conduction,  must  be  well  understood;  other- 
wise, in  the  application  of  the  principles  to  investigation,  errors 
will  frequently  creep  in.  Their  effect  may  be  shown  in  the 
following  instances :— a  loop  of  four  wires,  0-048  of  an  inch  in 
diameter  (3136.),  was  passed  over  the  pole  of  the  magnet,  and 
produced  a  certain  result  of  deflection  or  swing;  when  the  wires 
were  separated  two  and  two,  so  as  to  be  half  or  three-quarters 
of  an  inch  apart,  and  when,  therefore,  in  moving  across  the  mag- 
netic field,  one  pair  went  before  the  others,  the  effect  was  less, 
for  the  reason  already  given  in  the  case  of  the  copper  cylinder 
(3137.).  When  three  wires  were  allowed  to  go  by  together,  but 
one  taken  aside  a  couple  of  inches,  the  effect  fell  very  much ;  and 
when  that  fourth  one  was  cut  across  to  prevent  the  return  current 
in  it,  the  effect  of  the  three  rose  at  the  galvanometer  very  greatly, 
almost  equaUing  the  effect  of  the  four  when  together. 

3 139.  A  loop  was  constructed  of  seventy-six  equal  fine  copper 
wires,  each  10-5  inches  long  and  0-0125  of  an  inch  in  diameter, 
and  its  effect  observed  when  more  and  more  of  the  wires  were 
cut  away.  As  it  is  the  comparison  of  the  smaller  numbers  of 
wires,  one  with  the  other,  that  is  of  most  value,  I  will  give  the 
averages  of  each  number  for  several  observations,  in  the  reverse 
order  in  which  they  were  obtained ;  and  I  introduce  the  results 
with  larger  numbers  of  wires  only  for  the  general  purpose  of 
showing  how  the  effect  passes  into  that  with  the  cyhnder  of  copper 
(3137.),  the  galvanometer  conductors  always  being  of  the  same 
length  and  thickness. 


1  wire  produced  an  average  swing  of 

2  wires  produced  an  average  swing  of 

3  wires  produced  an  average  swing  of 

4  wires  produced  an  average  swing  of 

5  wires  produced  an  average  swing  of 


o 

«-3 
15-3 
21-8 
27-9 
34-4 
2  A  2 


356 


Lines  of  magnetic  force.    [Series  XXVIII. 


6  wires  produced  an  average  swing  of  .    .  37*8 

8  wires  produced  an  average  swing  of  .    .    50"  I 

12  wires  produced  an  average  swing  of  .    .  65-1 

16  wires  produced  an  average  swing  of  .    .    80' 5 

26  wires  produced  an  average  swing  of  .    .  118*0 

36  almost  swung  the  needle  round* 

46  stronger  than  the  last. 

56  swung  the  needle  quite  round. 

66  a  little  stronger. 

76  stronger :  swung  the  needle  freely  round  the  circle. 

Each  time  that  the  needle  passed  180°,  it  was  returned,  that  the 
torsion  force  might  remain  the  same  for  every  case. 

3140.  When  the  loop  of  four  equal  wires  (3136.)  was  employed, 
so  arranged  that,  in  respect  of  the  part  which  passed  between 
the  poles,  they  should  be  close  together  in  one  plane,  it  made  no 
difference  in  the  result,  whether  that  plane  was  perpendicular  to 
the  magnetic  axis  or  parallel  to  it;  «.  e.  whether  the  wires  in 
moving,  formed  a  band  which  moved  edgeways  or  flat  ways ;  the 
results  were  the  same  as  with  the  four  wires  close  together,  so 
as  to  represent,  as  far  as  they  could,  a  roimd  or  square  wire. 

3141.  From  all  these  results  it  may  be  concluded,  that  the 
current  or  am.ount  of  electricity  evolved  in  the  wire  moving 
amongst  the  lines  of  force,  is  not,  simply,  as  the  space  occupied 
by  its  breadth  correspondent  to  the  direction  of  the  line  of  force, 
which  has  relation  to  the  polarity  of  the  power,  nor  by  that 
width  or  dimension  of  it  which  includes  the  number  or  amount 
of  the  lines  of  force,  and  which,  corresponding  to  the  direction 
of  the  motion,  has  relation  to  the  equatorial  condition  of  the  lines ; 
but  is  jointly  as  the  compound  ratio  of  the  two,  or  as  the  mass 
of  the  moving  wire.  The  power  acts  just  as  well  on  the  interior 
portions  of  the  wire  as  on  the  exterior  or  superficial  portions, 
and  a  central  particle,  surrounded  on  all  sides  by  copper,  is  just 
in  the  same  relation  to  the  force  as  those  which,  being  superficial, 
have  air  next  them  on  one  side. 

3142.  By  immersing  the  poles  of  the  magnet  in  different 
media,  and  then  making  comparative  experiments  with  the  same 
copper  wire  loop  (3145.),  it  was  found  that  the  amount  of  the 
induced  current  was  the  same  in  air,  water,  alcohol  and  oil  of  tur- 
pentine.   The  experiments  in  air  were  repeated  between  those 


Oct.  1851.]    Moving  ivires — variation  of  mbstunce.  357 

with  the  liquids,  so  as  to  give  a  very  consistent  and  safe  result 
as  to  the  equality  of  action  in  all  the  cases. 


3143.  The  effect  of  variation  of  substance  vv^as  the  next  subject 
which  seemed  to  me  important  to  bring  under  investigation, 
because  it  has  a  direct  relation  to  the  amount  of  force  exerted, 
or  ready  to  be  exerted,  within  solid  bodies,  at.  any  distance  from 
the  magnet,  in  situations  and  under  circumstances  where  it  was 
absolutely  impossible  to  apply  the  vibrations  of  a  magnetic  needle, 
or  any  other  form  of  the  effects  of  attractive  and  repulsive  forces. 
The  interior  of  such  bodies  as  iron,  copper,  bismuth,  mercury, 
&c.,  including  the  most  paramagnetic  and  the  most  diamagnetic, 
seemed,  in  this  way,  open  to  experimental  investigation,  both 
as  to  the  amount  of  lines  of  force  traversing  them  under  vai'ious 
circumstances,  and  also  as  to  the  direction  of  the  lines  or  their 
polarity. 

3144.  In  an  early  series  of  these  Researches',  experiments 
bearing  upon  this  subject  are  described  (205-213.).  Wires  of 
different  metals  were  moved  across  the  lines  of  force  of  a  magnet, 
and  the  result  arrived  at  was,  that  the  currents  induced  in  these 
different  bodies  were  proportional  to  their  electro-conduction 
power  (202.  213.). 

3145.  The  thick  wire  galvanometer  (3123.),  with  its  good  and 
short  conducting  communications,  promised  however  better  re- 
sults, and  therefore  loops  like  those  already  described  of  copper 
wire  (3 133.),  were  pijf  pared  with  wires  of  different  metals,  all  of  the 
same  diameter,  namely,  0*04  of  an  inch,  being  only  ^-^th  of  the 
substance  of  the  conducting  and  galvanometer  wire.  The  metals 
were  copper,  silver,  iron,  tin,  lead,  platinum,  zinc.  Under  these 
circumstances  the  substance  concerned  in  the  excitement  of  the 
current  is  made  to  vary,  whilst  the  conducting  part  of  the  system 
is  very  good  and  remains  the  same.  The  results  with  these 
loops  were  as  follows,  being  the  average  of  from  six  to  ten  ex- 
periments for  each  loop  : — 

o  o 
Copper   .    .    63-0  Iron  .    .    .  IS'O 

Silver.    .    .    61-9  Platinum     .  16-9 

Zinc  .    .    .    31-5  Lead  .    .    .  12-1 

Tin    .    .    .  19-1 

'  Philosophical  Transactions,  1832,  pp.  179-182. 


358 


Lines  of  magnetic  force.    [Series  XXVIII. 


3146.  In  order  to  dismiss,  as  much  as  possible,  the  obstruction 
caused  by  bad  conducting  power,  and  bring  out  any  difference 
that  might  exist  between  paramagnetic  and  diamagnetic  metals, 
three  metals  were  selected,  namely,  tin,  iron  and  lead  in  wires,  as 
before,  of  0  04  of  an  inch  diameter  ;  but  the  length  was  restricted 
to  3  inches,  instead  of  extending  to  10*5  inches,  and  the  rest  of 
the  loop  VA  as  made  vip  of  the  conducting  copper  wire  of  0*2  in 
diameter,  as  in  fig.  18.    Of  course,  the  effect  of  the  whole  loop 


Fig.  18. 


a 
h 


is  a  mixed  effect,  being  partly  due  to  the  power  represented  by 
the  lines  intersected  by  the  thick  copper  portion,  and  partly  by 
those  intersected  by  the  three  inches  of  special  wire  passing 
between  the  poles.  But  as  the  great  amount  of  force  is  concen- 
trated within  a  space  not  more  than  an  inch  and  a  half  or 
2  inches  in  extent  (as  is  seen  on  carrying  any  of  the  loops  across 
the  magnetic  axis),  and  as  even  that  could  be  made  still  more 
concentrated  by  using  the  iron  cube  (3129.),  and  so  bringing  the 
poles  virtually  nearer  to  each  other,  it  was  hoped  that  the  chief 
effect  would  be  there,  and  so  any  peculiar  difference  existing 
between  iron  on  the  one  hand  and  tin  and  lead  on  the  other,  be 
rendered  manifest,  especially  as  the  resistance  to  conduction  was 
greatly  diminished  by  shortening  the  wires  from  10*5  to  3  inches. 

3147.  The  many  experiments  made  wifh  each  metal  were 
very  close  together.  The  average  of  the  results  for  the  three 
metals  was  as  follows  : — 

Tin      ......  37-1 

Iron  34-8 

Lead  25'4 

The  proportions,  and  therefore  the  results,  are  almost  identical 
with  those  obtained  before  (3145.). 

3148.  When  lead  and  copper,  arranged  at  the  bar  magnets 
(3084.  3085.),  had  been  compared  in  former  experiments  with 
each  other  by  the  fine  w'ire  galvanometer,  the  results  for  both 
had  been  the  same.  But  then  the  two  wires  used  were  short, 
and  far  thicker  than  the  wires  of  the  galvanometer  or  of  the 
conducting  circuit,  and  were  therefore  limited  in  the  production 


Oct.  1851.]    Moving  wires — variation  of  substance. 


359 


of  their  peculiar  action,  by  those  circumstances  of  mass  already- 
described  (3137.)'  "i'o  show  that  that  was  the  case,  I  now,  with 
the  thick  wire  galvanometer,  employed  two  equal  loops  of 
copper  and  iron  wire,  0*2  of  an  inch  in  thickness,  fig.  16 
(3133.),  passing  them  equably  over  the  pole  of  the  small  horse- 
shoe magnet,  reduced  by  the  keeper  (3134.).  The  results  were 
very  consistent,  and  the  mean  of  them  was,  for 

o 

Copper  41-7 

Iron  33-7 

3149.  Here,  therefore,  the  difference  between  copper  and  iron 
is  not  so  great  as  that  of  1  to  1*24  ;  Avhilst  when  the  conductors, 
not  concerned  in  the  excitement,  were  very  good,  and  able, 
comparatively,  to  carry  on  to  the  galvanometer  nearly  all  the 
effect  of  the  excitement,  it  was  as  great  as  1  to  3*5,  the  dif- 
ference being  in  the  latter  case  above  tenfold  what  it  is  in  the 
former. 

3150.  To  raise  the  effect  dependent  upon  the  mass  in  relation 
to  that  of  the  conducting  wires  to  a  still  higher  degree,  1  had  a 
cylinder  of  iron,  5*5  inches  in  length  and  0*7  of  an  inch  in 
diameter,  soldered  on  to  the  ends  of  conducting  wires,  so  as  to 
be  in  all  respect  like  that  of  copper  before  described  (3137.)' 
In  this  case  the  iron  not  only  rose  up  to  the  copper  in  effect, 
but  even  surpassed  it;  the  results  being  for  copper  35°-66,  and 
for  iron  38°'32.  Thus,  under  these  circumstances  of  mass,  the 
difference  between  iron  and  copper  disappears.  The  apparent 
inferiority  of  copper  is  probably  due  to  the  lateral  discharge, 
which  before  reduced  the  effect  of  a  cylinder  below  that  of  a 
thick  wire  (3137.)'  The  iron  being  a  worse  conductor  in  itself, 
and  having  equally  good  conductors  in  the  prolongation  of  the 
circuit  as  when  it  was  employed  as  wire,  would,  I  think,  have 
proportionately  less  lateral  discharge  in  it  than  the  copper. 

3151.  For  a  comparison,  both  as  regards  the  particular  sub- 
stance and  the  mass,  I  attached  a  similar  cylinder  of  bismuth  to 
conductors.  Its  effect,  with  the  same  magnet  and  force,  was 
23°;  a  very  high  proportion  in  relation  to  the  copper,  and  no 
doubt  due  to  its  mass.  If  it  could  have  been  compared  as  a 
wire,  only  0-04  in  diameter  (3145.),  it  would  probably  have  ap- 
peared almost  indifferent  (3127.) 

^  When  bismuth  is  soldered  into  the  circuit,  it  lequiies  to  be  left  a  long 


360 


Lines  of  magnetic  foree.    [Series  XXVIII. 


3152.  So  the  current  of  electricity  excited  in  different  sub- 
stances, moving  across  lines  of  magnetic  force,  appears  to  be 
directly  as  the  conducting  power  of  the  substance.  It  appears 
to  have  no  particular  reference  to  the  magnetic  character  of  the 
body,  for  iron  comes  between  tin  and  platinum,  presenting  no 
other  distinction  than  that  due  to  conducting  power,  and  differ- 
ing far  less  from  them,  than  they  do  from  other  metals  not 
magnetic. 

3153.  The  amount  of  lines  of  force  (and  of  the  force  repre- 
sented by  them)  appears,  therefore,  to  be  equal  for  equal  spaces 
occupied  and  traversed  by  tin,  iron,  and  platina  under  the  cir- 
cumstances ;  for  the  difference  in  result  is  in  no  proportion  to  the 
ordinary  magnetic  difference,  and  only  as  the  conducting  power. 
This  agrees  with  the  conclusion  before  arrived  at,  that,  for  air, 
water,  bismuth,  oxygen,  nitrogen,  or  a  vacuum,  the  lines  of  force 
are  the  same  in  amount,  except  as  they  are  more  or  less  concen- 
trated in  the  substance  across  which  they  pass  (2807.)5  according 
as  it  is  more  or  less  competent  to  conduct  (2797-)>  transmit 
the  magnetic  force. 


3154.  Such  a  conclusion  as  that  just  arrived  at,  brings  on  the 
question  of  what  is  magnetic  polarity ,  and  how  is  it  to  be  defined  ? 
For  my  own  part,  I  should  understand  the  term  to  mean,  the 
opposite  and  antithetical  actions  which  are  mxanifested  at  the 
opposite  ends,  or  the  opposite  sides,  of  a  limited  (or  imlimited) 
portion  of  a  line  of  force  (2835.).  The  line  of  dip  of  the  earth, 
or  a  part  of  it,  may  again  be  referred  to  as  the  natural  case;  and 
a  free  needle  above  or  below  the  part,  or  a  wire  moving  across  it 
(3076.  3079.),  will  give  the  direction  of  the  polarity.  If  we  refer 
to  an  entirely  different  and  artificial  source  as  the  electro-mag- 
netic helix,  the  same  meaning  and  description  will  apply. 

3155.  If  the  term  jjolarity  have  any  meaning,  which  has  re- 
ference to  experimental  facts  and  not  to  hypotheses  only,  beyond 
that  included  in  the  above  description,  I  am  not  aware  that  it 

time  before  it  is  used  for  experiments,  and  should  then  be  covered  up,  and 
the  loop  handled  with  great  care ;  otherwise  thermo-currents  are  produced. 
For  an  hour  or  two  after  soldering  it  generates  electrical  currents,  which 
appear  at  the  galvanometer  very  irregularly,  being  probably  due  to  internal 
molecular  changes,  which  occur  from  time  to  time  until  the  whole  has  ac- 
quired a  permanent  state  of  etiuilibrium. 


Oct.  1851.] 


Magnetic  polm'ity. 


361 


has  ever  been  distinctly  and  clearly  expressed.  It  may  be  so, 
for  I  dare  not  venture  to  say  that  I  recollect  all  I  have  read,  or 
even  all  the  conclusions  I  myself  have  at  different  times  come  to. 
But  if  it  neither  have,  nor  should  have,  any  other  meaning,  then 
the  question  arises,  is  it  correctly  exhibited  or  indicated  in  every 
case  by  attractions  and  repulsions,  i.  e.  by  such  like  mutual  ac- 
tions of  particular  bodies  on  each  other  under  the  magnetic  influ- 
ence ?  A  weak  solution  of  protosulphate  of  iron,  if  surrounded 
by  water,  will,  in  the  magnetic  field,  point  axially;  if  in  a  stronger 
solution  than  itself,  it  will  point  equatorially  (2357-  2366.  2422.). 
The  same  is  true  with  stronger  cases.  We  cannot  doubt  it  would 
be  true  even  up  to  iron,  nickel,  and  cobalt,  if  we  could  render 
these  bodies  fluid  in  turn  without  altering  their  paramagnetic 
power,  or  if  we  had  the  command  of  magnets  and  of  paramag- 
netic and  diamagnetic  media,  stronger  or  weaker  at  pleasure. 
But  in  the  case  of  the  solutions,  we  cannot  suppose  that  the 
weaker  has  one  polarity  in  the  stronger  solution  and  another  in 
the  water.  The  lines  of  force  across  the  magnetic  field  have  the 
same  general  polarity  in  all  the  cases,  and  would  be  shown  ex- 
perimentally to  have  it,  by  the  moving  wire  (3076.),  though  not 
by  the  attractions  and  repulsions, 

3156.  Hei-e,  therefore,  we  have  a  difference  in  the  two  modes 
of  experimental  indication  ;  not  merely  as  to  the  method,  but  as 
to  the  nature  of  the  results,  and  the  very  principles  which  are 
concerned  in  their  production.  Hence  the  value  I  think  of  the 
moving  wire  as  an  investigator;  for  it  leads  us  into  inquiries 
which  touch  upon  the  very  nature  of  the  magnetic  force.  There 
is  no  doubt  that  the  needle  gives  true  experimental  indications ; 
but  it  is  not  so  sure  that  we  always  interpret  them  correctly. 
To  assume  that  pointing  is  always  the  direct  effect  of  attractive 
and  repulsive  forces  acting  in  couples  (as  in  the  cases  in  ques- 
tion, or  as  in  bismuth  crystals),  is  to  shut  out  ideas,  in  relation 
to  magnetism,  which  are  already  applied  in  the  theories  of  the 
nature  of  light  and  electricity ;  and  the  shutting  out  of  such 
ideas  may  be  an  obstruction  to  the  advancement  of  truth  and  a 
defence  of  wrong  assumptions  and  error. 

3157.  What  is  the  idea  of  polarity  in  a  field  of  equal  force? 
(whether  it  be  occupied  by  air  or  by  a  mass  of  soft  iron?).  A 
magnetic  needle,  or  an  oblong  piece  of  iron,  would  not  show  it 
in  the  air  or  elsewhere,  except  by  disturbing  the  equal  arrange- 


362 


Lines  of  magnetic  force.    [Series  XXVI 1 1. 


ment  of  the  force  and  rendering  it  unequal ;  for  on  that  the 
pointing  of  the  needle  or  the  iron,  or  the  motions  of  either 
towards  the  walls  of  the  magnetic  field,  if  limited  (2828.),  would 
depend.  A  crystal  of  bismuth  in  showing  this  polarity  by  posi- 
tion (2464.  2839.),  does  it  without  much  altering  the  distribu- 
tion of  the  force,  and  the  alteration  which  does  take  place  is  in 
the  contrary  direction  to  that  effected  by  iron  (2807.),  for  it 
expands  the  lines  of  force.  It  seems  readily  possible  that  a 
magnecrystal  might  exist,  which,  when  in  its  stable  position, 
should  neither  cause  the  convergence  nor  divergence  of  the 
lines  of  force  within  it.  It  need  only  be  neutral  in  relation  to 
space  or  any  surrounding  medium  in  that  direction,  and  dia- 
magnetic  in  its  relation  in  the  transverse  direction,  and  the  con- 
ditions would  be  fulfilled. 

3158.  But  though  an  ordinary  magnetic  needle  cannot  show 
polarity  in  a  field  of  equal  force',  having  no  reference  to  it,  and 
in  fact  ignoring  such  a  condition  of  things,  a  moving  wire  makes 
it  manifest  instantly,  and  also  shows  the  full  amount  of  magnetic 
power  to  which  such  polarity  belongs ;  and  this  it  does  without 
disturbing  the  distribution  of  the  power,  as  far  as  we  comprehend 
or  understand  distribution,  w  hen  thinking  of  magnetic  needles. 
At  least  such  at  present  appears  to  me  to  be  the  case,  from  the 
consideration  of  the  action  of  thin  and  thick  wires  (3141.)  and 
wires  of  different  substances  (3153.). 

3159.  As  an  experimentalist,  I  feel  bound  to  let  experiment 
guide  me  into  any  train  of  thought  w^hich  it  may  justify  ;  being 
satisfied  that  experiment,  like  analysis,  must  lead  to  strict  truth 
if  rightly  interpreted ;  and  be- 
lieving also,  that  it  is  in  its  ^'S-  ^9' 

nature  far  more  suggestive  of 
new  trains  of  thought  and 
new  conditions  of  natural 
power.  In  order  to  extend 
its  indications,  and  vary  the 
form  in  which  the  principle  of 
the  moving  wire  may  be  ap- 
plied, I  had  an  apparatus  con- 
structed, fig.  19,  consisting  of 
a  wooden  axis,  one  extremity 

'  One  could  easily  imagine  hypothctically  a  needle  that  should  do  so. 


Oct.  1851.] 


Magnetic  jwlarity. 


363 


of  which  was  terminated  by  a  copper  screw,  intended  to  receive 
and  carry  one  or  more  discs  of  metal  that  might  be  screwed  on 
to  it.  This  end  projected  so  far  beyond  the  support,  that  such 
discs  could  be  partly  introduced  between  the  poles  of  a  horse- 
shoe magnet,  so  as  when  revolving,  to  move  across  the  lines  of 
force  at  their  most  intense  place  of  action  ;  and,  whilst  the  mag- 
net and  the  apparatus  continued  fixed,  to  revolve  continuously 
across  the  same  lines  of  force.  One  of  the  galvanometer  wires 
was  pointed,  and  so  held  as  to  bear  into  and  against  the  surface 
of  a  cup-shaped  cavity  at  the  end  of  the  axial  screw ;  and  the 
other  was  applied  by  the  hand,  or  so  fixed  as  to  bear  by  a 
rounded  part  against  the  rim  of  the  disc,  at  that  point  which 
was  furthest  within  the  poles  of  the  magnet. 

3160.  Discs  of  metal  were  prepared  for  this  apparatus,  each 
2*5  inches  in  diameter,  and  of  different  thicknesses  and  material. 
When  a  disc  of  copper  was  fixed  on  the  axis,  and  adjusted  in 
association  with  the  large  horseshoe  magnet  (3.159.),  as  described 
above,  three,  or  even  two  revolutions  of  it,  would  deflect  the 
needle  of  the  thick  wire  galvanometer  through  a  swing  of  30°. 
In  this  apparatus,  the  most  effectual  part  of  the  portion  of  the 
disc  which  is  at  any  moment  passing  across  the  magnetic  axis, 
is  that  which  is  near  the  circumference ;  for  it  has  the  greatest 
velocity,  consequently  moves  through  more  space,  and  that  in  a 
part  where  the  lines  of  force  are  most  concentrated. 

3161.  The  contact  at  the  end  of  the  axle  should  always  be 
carefully  watched  and  made  good.  The  degree  of  pressure  on 
the  edge  of  the  disc  should  not  be  too  slight;  otherwise  the 
contact,  under  the  circumstances  of  the  motion,  is  not  sufficient 
to  carry  forward  the  same  constant  proportion  of  current 
generated.  Neither  should  it  be  made  at  the  angles  of  the  disc 
edge ;  if  a  grating  or  cutting  friction  occur,  an  electric  current  is 
generated  by  it.  With  a  smooth  hard  friction  of  copper  wire 
against  the  copper  disc  there  is  very  little  evolution  of  current. 
When  the  copper  wire  presses  against  the  edge  of  an  iron  disc 
there  is  far  more.  In  either  case,  however,  the  effect  may  be 
eliminated  or  compensated ;  for,  in  whichever  direction  the  disc 
is  revolved  without  the  magnet,  the  deviation  of  the  needle,  if  any 
be  produced,  remains  the  same ;  whereas,  when  the  magnet  is  in 
place,  the  deviations  produced  by  it  are  in  the  reversed  direction 
for  reversed  revolutions.    Hence,  if  an  equal  number  of  revoiu- 


364 


Lines  of  magnetic  force.    [Skries  XX  VIII. 


tions  be  made  in  the  two  directions,  and  the  unequal  deflections 
in  opposite  directions  be  noted,  the  half  of  their  sum  will  give 
nearly  the  amount  of  deflection  which  would  have  occurred  if  no 
current  had  been  exerted  by  friction  at  the  edge,  i.  e.  provided 
the  deflections  have  not  been  through  large  arcs.  These  effects 
of  friction  are  no  doubt  objections  to  the  principle  in  this  form ; 
still  the  results  are,  as  it  appears  to  me,  valuable  in  relation  to 
copper  and  iron,  and  are  as  follows. 

3162.  A  copper  disc,  0*05  of  an  inch  in  thickness,  gave  a 
swing  deflection  for  two  revolutions,  which,  being  the  average  of 
several  experiments,  =20°*8.  A  second  copper  disc,  of  0*1  of 
an  inch  in  thickness,  gave  an  average  deflection  of  27°'8.  A 
third  copper  disc,  of  0*2  in  thickness,  gave  a  deflection  of  26^'5. 
Here,  therefore,  not  only  has  the  thickness  (with  these  conditions 
of  contact)  been  attained  for  the  maximum  effect,  but  even  sur- 
passed (3137.)-  Then  an  iron  disc  of  0*05  in  thickness,  was 
placed  on  the  axle,  and  gave,  as  its  mean  result,  a  deflection  of 
15°'4.  Another  iron  disc  of  four  times  the  thickness  (or  0*2) 
gave  a  deflection  only  of  14°.  So  here  also,  as  before,  the  thick- 
ness of  maximum  effect  had  been  surpassed. 

3163.  The  two  discs  of  copper  and  iron  of  0*2  in  thickness 
each,  which  had  produced  separately  the  respective  deviations 
of  26°*5  and  14°,  were  then  both  fixed  on  the  axle,  being 
separated  from  mutual  contact  in  respect  of  their  mass,  by  a  disc 
of  paper,  though  both  were  of  course  in  contact  at  the  centre  of 
motion  with  the  copper  axle,  by  means  of  which  the  electric 
communication  was  perfected.  In  arranging  their  place  between 
the  poles  of  the  magnet,  the  iron  was  placed  at  mid-distance, 
and  therefore  the  copper  a  little  on  one  side.  When  the  copper 
disc  was  brought  into  the  circuit,  it,  by  two  revolutions,  gave  an 
average  deviation  of  23°*4 ;  and  when  the  iron  disc  was  in  the 
circuit,  the  deviation  produced  by  it  was  11°'91.  Here,  there- 
fore, the  proportions  were  nearly  the  same,  when  the  two  discs 
were  subject  at  the  same  moment  to  the  magnetic  power,  as 
when  they  were  examined  separately.  Both  liave  fallen  a  little, 
but  not  in  any  manner  which  seems  to  indicate  that  the  iron  has 
had  any  peculiar  influence  in  altering  or  affecting  the  hnes  of 
force  passing  across  the  magnetic  field.  The  effect  which  has 
taken  place,  appears  to  be  one  due  to  the  action  of  the  collateral 
mass  of  conducting  matter. 


Oct.  1851.] 


Magnetic  jwlarily. 


3164.  If  the  direction  of  the  electric  current  induced  by  the 
magnetic  force  in  the  moving  metal  be  taken  as  the  true  indica- 
tion of  polarity,  and,  I  think,  it  cannot  be  denied  that  it  repre- 
sents that  character  of  the  force,  which  the  term  polarity  is 
intended  to  express,  and  is  unchangeably  associated  with  that 
character;  then  these  results  show  that  the  polarity  of  the  lines 
of  force  within  the  iron  is  the  same  with  that  within  the  copper, 
when  both  ai'e  submitted  in  like  manner  to  the  magnetic  force. 
In  association  with  the  former  and  new  results  with  bismuth 
(2431.  3151.  3168.),  and  numerous  other  phsenomena,  the  same 
conclusion  may  be  drawn  as  to  the  lines  of  force  within  that  sub- 
stance, for  the  effects  are  the  same  with  regard  to  the  production 
of  a  current  in  it ;  and  so  further  evidence  is  added  to  that  which 
I  have  given,  tending  to  show  that  bismuth  is  not  polarized  in  the 
reverse  direction  as  iron  or  a  magnet  (2429.  2640.).  By  i*eference 
to  the  phaenomena  presented  by  the  relative  actions  of  paramag- 
netic and  diamagnetic  substances,  the  same  conclusions  may  be 
drawn  with  respect  to  all  bodies  and  to  space  itself  (2787-  &c.). 

3165.  That  the  iron  disc  affects  the  disposition  of  the  lines  of 
force,  is  no  doubt  true,  and  the  extent  to  which  this  is  done  is 
easily  seen,  by  fixing  a  small  magnetic  needle,  about  0*1  or  0*05 
of  an  inch  in  length,  across  the  middle  of  a  piece  of  stretched 
thread  as  an  axis,  and  then  bringing  it  into  the  magnetic  field 
and  near  the  edges  of  the  stationary  disc.  The  lines  of  force  will 
be  seen  (3071.  3076.)  gathering  in  upon  the  iron  at  and  near  its 
edge,  but  only  for  a  very  little  distance  from  it  in  any  direction  : 
the  effect  is  that  which  I  have  considered  proper  to  a  paramag- 
netic body  (2807.).  Elsewhere,  the  li  nes  of  force  go  with  the 
same  direction  across  the  magnetic  field  where  the  iron  is,  as 
where  it  is  not ;  and  it  is  to  me  a  proved  fact,  proved  by  the 
numerous  results  given,  that  a  section  of  the  lines  of  force 
taken  across  the  magnetic  field  through  the  air,  close  to  the 
iron,  is  exactly  equal  in  amount  of  force  to  a  section  taken 
across  parallel  to  and  through  the  iron  disc  (3163.).  All  iron 
under  induction  must  have  just  as  much  force,  i.  e.  lines  of 
force  in  its  internal  parts,  as  is  equivalent  to  the  lines  which 
fall  on  to,  and  are  continued  through  and  out  of  it ;  and  the 
same  is  true,  as  it  appears  to  me,  of  any  other  paramagnetic 
or  diamagnetic  substance  whatever.  The  same  is  true  for  the 
magnet  itself;  for  a  section  through  the  magnet  has  been  shown 


366 


Lines  of  magnetic  force.    [Series  XXVIII. 


to  be  exactly  equal  to  a  section  anywhere  through  the  outer 
lines  of  force  (3121.),  and  these  sections  may  be  taken  at  the 
surface  of  the  magnet,  where  they  may  be  considered  as  either 
in  the  air  or  in  the  magnet  indifferently ;  and  therefore  alike  in 
size,  shape,  power,  polarity,  and  every  other  point. 

3166.  I  have  used  the  phrase  conduction  polarity  on  a  former 
occasion  (2818.  2835.),  but  so  limited,  that  it  could  lead  to  no 
mistake  of  my  meaning,  either  then  or  now.  It  requires  no 
words  to  show  how  it  is  included  in  the  higher  and  general 
expression  of  the  direction  or  polarity  of  the  lines  of  force. 


3167.  Some  other  results  with  the  disc  apparatus  (3159.) 
were  obtained,  which  it  may  be  useful  to  describe  here.  Tin 
was  formed  into  a  disc  of  0*1  in  thickness,  and  2*5  inches  in 
diameter.  The  effect  of  the  friction  of  the  copper  conductor 
at  its  edge,  was  a  feeble  current,  the  reverse  of  that  produced 
in  the  cases  of  copper  and  iron  (3161.);  but  the  current  pro- 
duced by  the  revolution,  and  dependent  on  the  polarity  of  the 
lines  of  force,  was  the  same  as  before.  It  produced  a  swing 
deflection  of  14°'9  for  two  revolutions  of  the  disc. 

3168.  A  disc  of  bismuth  produced  far  too  strong  a  current  by 
friction  against  the  copper  conductor,  to  allow  of  any  useful  result 
in  its  simple  state.  A  ring  of  copper  foil  was  therefore  formed, 
and  being  placed  tightly  on  the  bismuth  disc,  was  wedged  up 
by  plates  of  clean  copper  foil,  so  as  to  produce  a  clean  hard 
contact ;  imperfect,  no  doubt,  but  as  general  as  could  be  made 
under  the  circumstances.  When  this  disc  was  rotated  in  the 
one  direction,  it  gave  a  deflection  in  the  same  direction  as  if 
a  copper  or  iron  disc  had  been  used;  when  rotated  the  other 
way.  the  deflection  was  little  or  nothing.  This  difference  is 
due  to  the  united  influence  of  the  rotation  effect  and  the  friction 
effect  in  the  one  case,  and  their  opposition  in  the  other;  but  the 
results  show  that  the  lines  of  force  are  in  the  same  direction 
through  bismuth,  when  between  the  magnetic  poles,  as  they 
are  through  copper  and  iron.  The  induced  current  is  small, 
both  because  of  the  bad  conducting  power  of  the  bismuth  and 
the  imperfect  contact  at  the  edge.  When  the  same  copper 
rim  was  placed  on  the  copper  disc,  it  reduced  the  deflection  of 
the  needle  from  26°-5  to  9°-34. 


Oct.  1851.]        Moving  discs — considerations. 


367 


3169.  In  illustration  of  the  etFect  produced  by  those  parts 
of  the  disc,  which,  not  being  in  the  place  of  greatest  action,  are 
conducting  back  those  currents  formed  by  the  radial  parts  in 
the  place  of  maximum  effect,  I  had  a  wooden  disc  constructed, 
0*2  in  thickness  and  2*5  inches  in  diameter,  the  centre  of  which 
was  copper,  for  the  purpose  of  attachment  and  electrical  con- 
nection, and  the  outer  edge  a  ring  of  copper  not  more  than  -^-^th. 
of  an  inch  in  thickness.  The  two  were  connected  by  a  single 
copper  wire  radius,  in  thickness  0'05  6  of  an  inch,  which,  as  the 
disc  revolved,  was  of  course  cai'ried  across  and  through  the 
magnetic  field.  It  gave  a  deflection  of  14°.  The  copper  disc 
of  0*05  thickness,  gave  only  an  average  of  28°.  Now,  though 
the  matter  of  the  copper  ring  round  the  wood  will  cause  part  of 
the  current,  yet  the  chief  portion  must  be  due  to  the  copper 
radius,  which,  at  the  effectual  part  near  the  edge  (3160.),  is  not 
more  than  the  ^loth  part  of  the  full  copper  disc;  Egid  this  indi- 
cates how  much  of  the  electricity  put  in  motion  there  by  the  mag- 
netic force  must  be  returned  back  in  short  circuits  in  the  other 
parts  of  the  disc. 

3170.  The  disc  apparatus  shows  well  the  dependence  of  the 
induced  current  upon  the  intersection  of  the  lines  offeree  (3082. 
3113.).  If  the  disc  be  so  arranged  as  to  stand  edgeways  to  the 
magnetic  poles,  and  in  the  plane  of  the  magnetic  axis,  so  that 
it  shall  be  parallel  to  the  Hues  of  force  which  pass  by  and  through 
it,  then  no  revolution  of  it,  with  the  most  powerful  magnet, 
produces  the  slightest  signs  of  a  current  at  the  galvanometer. 


3171.  The  relation  of  the  induced  current  to  the  electro-con- 
ducting power  of  the  substance,  amongst  the  metals  (3152.), 
leads  to  the  presumption  that  with  other  bodies,  as  water,  wax, 
glass,  &c.,  it  is  absent,  only  in  consequence  of  the  great  defi- 
ciency of  conducting  power.  I  thought  that  processes  analo- 
gous to  those  employed  with  the  metals,  might  in  such  non- 
conductors as  shell-lac,  sulphur,  &c.,  yield  some  results  of  static 
electricity  (181.  192.) ;  and  have  made  many  experiments  with 
this  view  in  the  intense  magnetic  field,  but  without  any  distinct 
result. 

3172.  All  the  results  described  are  those  obtained  with  moving 
metals.    But  mere  motion  would  not  generate  a  relation,  which 


368 


Lines  of  magnetic  force.    [Series  XXVIII. 


had  not  a  foundation  in  the  existence  of  some  previous  state ; 
and  therefore  the  quiescent  metals  must  be  in  some  relation  to 
the  active  centre  of  force,  and  that  not  necessarily  dependent  on 
their  paramagnetic  or  diamagnetic  condition,  because  a  metal 
at  zero  in  that  respect,  would  have  an  electric  current  generated 
in  it  as  w^ell  as  the  others.  The  relation  is  not  as  the  attractions 
or  repulsions  of  the  metals,  and  therefore  not  magnetic  in  the 
common  sense  of  the  word ;  but  according  to  some  other  function 
of  the  power.  Iron,  copper,  and  bismuth  are  very  different  in 
the  former  sense,  but  when  moving  across  the  lines  of  force, 
give  the  same  general  result,  modified  only  by  electro-con- 
ducting power. 

3173.  If  such  a  condition  be  hereafter  verified  by  experiment 
and  the  idea  of  an  electrotonic  state  (60.  242.  1114.  1661. 1729.) 
be  revived  and  established,  then,  such  bodies  as  water,  oil, 
resin,  &c.,  w'ill  probably  be  included  in  the  same  state ;  for  the 
non-conducting  condition,  w-hich  prevents  the  formation  of  a 
current  in  them,  does  not  militate  against  the  existence  of  that 
condition  which  is  prior  to  the  effect  of  motion.  A  piece  of 
copper,  which  cannot  have  the  current,  because  it  is  not  in  a 
circuit  (3087-)^  ^  piece  of  lac,  which  cannot,  because  it  is  a 
non-conductor  of  electricity,  may  have  peculiar  but  analogous 
states  when  moving  across  a  field  of  magnetic  power. 

3174.  On  bringing  this  paper  to  a  close,  I  cannot  refrain 
from  again  expressing  my  conviction  of  the  truthfulness  of  the 
representation,  which  the  idea  of  lines  of  force  affords  in  regard 
to  magnetic  action.  All  the  points  which  are  experimentally 
established  with  regard  to  that  action,  i.  e.  all  that  is  not  hypo- 
thetical, appear  to  be  well  and  truly  represented  by  it.  What- 
ever idea  we  employ  to  represent  the  power,  ought  ultimately 
to  include  electric  forces,  for  the  two  are  so  related  that  one 
expression  ought  to  serve  for  both.  In  this  respect,  the  idea 
of  lines  of  force  appears  to  me  to  have  advantages  over  the 
method  of  representing  magnetic  forces  by  centres  of  action. 
In  a  straight  wire,  for  instance,  carrying  an  electric  current,  it 
is  apparently  impossible  to  represent  the  magnetic  forces  by 
centres  of  action,  whereas  the  lines  of  force  simply  and  truly 
represent  them.  The  study  of  these  lines  have,  at  different 
times,  been  greatly  influential  in  leading  me  to  various  results, 
which  I  think  prove  their  utility  as  well  as  fertility.    Thus,  the 


Oct.  1851.]  Value  of  the  moving  wii^e. 


369 


law  of  magneto-electric  induction  (114.);  the  earth's  inductive 
action  (149.  161.  l7l-);  the  relation  of  magnetism  and  light 
(2146.  and  note) ;  diamagnetic  action  and  its  law  (2243.),  and 
magnecrystallic  action  (2454.),  are  cases  of  this  kind :  and  a 
similar  influence  of  them,  over  my  mind,  will  be  seen  in  the 
further  instances  of  the  polarity  of  diamagnetic  bodies  (2640.) ; 
the  relation  of  magnetic  curves  and  the  evolved  electric  currents 
(243.);  the  explication  of  Arago's  phtenomenon  (81.),  and  the 
distinction  between  that  and  ordinary  magnetism  (243.  245.) ; 
the  relation  of  electric  and  magnetic  forces  (1 709.) ;  the  views 
regarding  magnetic  conduction  (2797.),  and  atmospheric  mag- 
netism (2847.).  I  bave  been  so  accustomed,  indeed,  to  employ 
them,  and  especially  in  my  last  Researches,  that  I  may,  unwit- 
tingly, have  become  prejudiced  in  their  favour,  and  ceased  to  be 
a  clear-sighted  judge.  Still,  I  have  always  endeavoured  to  make 
experiment  the  test  and  controller  of  theory  and  opinion ;  but 
neither  by  that  nor  by  close  cross  examination  in  principle,  have 
I  been  made  aware  of  any  error  involved  in  their  use. 

3175.  Whilst  writing  this  paper  I  perceive,  that,  in  the  late 
Series  of  these  Researches,  Nos.  XXV.  XXVI.  XXVII.,  I  have 
sometimes  used  the  term  lines  of  force  so  vaguely,  as  to  leave 
the  reader  doubtful  whether  I  intended  it  as  a  merely  repre- 
sentative idea  of  the  forces,  or  as  the  description  of  the  path 
along  which  the  power  was  continuously  exerted.  What  I  have 
said  in  the  beginning  of  this  paper  (3075.)  will  render  that 
matter  clear.  I  have  as  yet  found  no  reason  to  wish  any  part 
of  those  papers  altered,  except  these  doubtful  expressions :  but 
that  will  be  rectified  if  it  be  understood,  that,  wherever  the  ex- 
pression line  of  force  is  taken  simply  to  represent  the  disposition 
of  the  forces,  it  shall  have  the  fullness  of  that  meaning ;  but  that 
wherever  it  may  seem  to  represent  the  idea  of  the  physical  mode 
of  transmission  of  the  force,  it  expresses  in  that  respect  the 
opinion  to  which  I  incline  at  present.  The  opinion  may  be 
erroneous,  and  yet  all  that  relates  or  refers  to  the  disposition  of 
the  force  will  remain  the  same. 

3176.  The  value  of  the  moving  wire  or  conductor,  as  an  exa- 
miner of  the  magnetic  forces,  appears  to  me  very  great,  because 
it  touches  the  physics  of  the  subject  in  a  manner  altogether  dif- 
ferent to  the  magnetic  needle.  It  not  only  gives  its  indications 
upon  a  different  principle  and  in  a  different  manner,  but  in  the 

VOL.  III.  2  B 


370 


Lines  of  magnetic  force.    [Series  XXVIII. 


mutual  action  of  it  and  the  source  of  power,  it  affects  the  power 
differently.  The  wire  when  quiescent  does  not  sensibly  disturb 
the  arrangement  of  the  force  in  the  magnetic  field ;  the  needle 
when  present  does.  When  the  wire  is  moving  it  does  not  sensibly 
disturb  the  forces  external  to  it,  unless  perhaps  in  large  masses, 
as  in  the  discs  (3163.),  or  when  time  is  concerned  (1730.),  i.  e.  it 
does  not  disturb  the  disposition  of  the  whole  force,  or  the  arrange- 
ment of  the  lines  of  force ;  a  field  of  equal  magnetic  power  is 
still  equal  to  anything  but  the  moving  wire,  whilst  the  wire 
moves  across  or  through  it.  The  moving  wire  also  indicates 
quantity  of  force,  independent  of  tension  (2870.) ;  it  shows  that 
the  quantity  within  a  magnet  and  that  outside  is  the  same,  though 
the  tension  be  very  different.  In  addition  to  these  advantageous 
points,  the  principle  is  available  within  magnets,  and  paramag- 
netic and  diamagnetic  bodies,  so  as  to  have  au  application  beyond 
that  of  the  needle,  and  thus  give  experimental  evidence,  of  a 
nature  not  otherwise  attainable. 

Royal  Institution, 
October  9,  IS51. 


371 


TWENTY-NINTH  SERIES'. 

§  35.  On  the  employment  of  the  Induced  Magneto-electric 
Current  as  a  test  and  measure  of  Magnetic  Forces. 

Received  December  31,  1851,— Read  March  25  and  April  1,  1852. 

3l77«  The  proposition  which  I  have  made  to  use  the  induced 
magneto-electric  current  as  an  experimental  indication  of  the 
presence,  direction  and  amount  of  magnetic  forces  (3074.),  makes 
it  requisite  that  I  should  also  clearly  demonstrate  the  principles 
and  develope  the  practice  necessary  for  such  a  piu-pose ;  and 
especially  that  I  should  prove  that  the  amount  of  current  in- 
duced is  precisely  proportionate  to  the  amount  of  Hues  of  mag- 
netic force  intersected  by  the  moving  wire,  in  which  the  electric 
current  is  generated  and  appears  (3082.  3109.).  The  proof 
already  given  is,  I  think,  sufficient  for  those  who  may  repeat  the 
experiments ;  but  in  order  to  accumulate  evidence,  as  is  indeed 
but  proper  in  the  first  announcement  of  such  a  proposition,  I  pro- 
ceeded to  experiment  with  the  magnetic  power  of  the  earth, 
which  presents  us  with  a  field  of  action,  not  rapidly  varying  in 
force  with  the  distance,  as  in  the  case  of  small  magnets,  but  one 
which  for  a  given  place  may  be  considered  as  uniform  in  power 
and  direction  ;  for  if  a  room  be  cleared  of  all  common  magnets, 
then  the  terrestrial  fines  of  magnetic  force  which  pass  through 
it,  have  one  common  direction,  being  that  of  the  dip,  as  indi- 
cated by  a  free  needle  or  other  means,  and  are  in  every  part  in 
equal  proportion  or  quantity,  i.  e.  have  equal  power.  Now  the 
force  being  the  same  everywhere,  the  proportion  of  it  to  the 
current  evolved  in  the  moving  wire  is  then  perhaps  more  simply 
and  directly  determined,  than  in  the  case  where,  a  small  magnet 
bemg  employed,  the  force  rapidly  changes  in  amount  with  the 
distance. 

'  Philosophical  Transactions,  1852,  p.  137. 

2  B  2 


372 


LAnes  of  magnetic  force .     [Series  XXIX. 


^  i.  Galvanometer. 

3178.  For  such  experimental  results  as  I  now  propose  to  give, 
I  must  refer  to  the  galvanometer  eiifployed  and  the  precautions 
requisite  for  its  proper  use.  The  instrument  has  been  already 
described  in  principle  (3123.),  and  a  figure  of  the  conductor 
v^hich  surrounds  the  needles,  given.  This  conductor  may  be 
considered  as  a  square  copper  bar,  0*2  of  an  inch  in  thickness, 
which  passes  twice  round  the  plane  of  vibration  of  each  of  the 
needles  forming  the  astatic  combination,  and  then  is  continued 
outwards  and  terminates  in  two  descending  portions,  which  are 
intended  to  dip  into  cups  of  mercury.  As  both  the  needles  are 
within  the  convolutions  of  this  bar,  an  indicating  bristle  or  fine 
wire  of  copper  is  fixed  parallel  to,  and  above  them  upon  the 
same  axis,  and  this,  in  travelling  over  the  usual  graduated  circle, 
shows  the  place  and  the  extent  of  vibration  or  swing  of  the 
needles  below.  The  suspension  is  by  cocoon  silk,  and  in  other 
respects  the  instrument  is  like  a  good  ordinary  galvanometer. 

3179.  It  is  highly  important  that  the  bar  of  copper  about  the 
needles  should  be  perfectly  clean.  The  vertical  zero  plane 
should,  according  to  the  construction,  be  midway  between  the 
two  vertical  coils  of  the  bar,  fig.  1 ;  instead  of  which  the 
needle  at  first  pointed  to  the  one  side  or  the 
other,  being  evidently  attracted  by  the  upright 
portions  of  the  bar.  I  at  first  feared  that  the 
copper  was  magnetic,  but  on  cleaning  the 
surface  carefully  with  fine  sand-paper,  I  was  c 
able  to  remove  this  effect,  due  no  doubt  to 
iron  communicated  by  handling  or  the  use  of 
tools,  and  the  needle  then  stood  truly  in  a 
plane  equidistant  from  the  two  coils,  when 
that  plane  corresponded  with  the  magnetic  me- 
ridian. 

3180.  The  connexions  for  this  galvanometer  (3123.  3133.) 
were  all  of  copper  rod  or  wire  0*2  of  an  inch  in  diameter;  but 
even  with  wires  of  this  thickness  the  extent  of  the  conductors 
should  not  be  made  more  than  is  necessary ;  for  the  increase 
from  6  to  8,  10  or  12  feet  in  length,  makes  a  considerable  dif- 
ference at  the  galvanometer,  when  electric  currents,  low  in  in- 
tensity, are  to  be  measured.    It  is  most  beautiful  to  observe  in 


Dec.  1851.]  Thick  wire  galvanometer. 


373 


such  cases  the  application  of  Ohm's  law  of  currents  to  the  effects 
produced.  When  the  connexions  were  extended  to  a  distance, 
straight  lengths  of  wire  with  dropping  ends  were  provided,  and 
these  by  dipping  into  cups  of  mercury  completed  the  connexion 
and  circuit.  The  cups  consisted  of  cavities  turned  in  flat  pieces 
of  wood.  The  ends  of  the  connecting  rods  and  of  the  galvano- 
meter bar  were  first  tinned,  and  then  amalgamated ;  after  which 
their  contact  with  the  mercury  was  both  ready  and  certain. 
Even  where  connexion  had  to  be  made  by  contact  of  the  solid 
substances,  I  found  it  very  convenient  and  certain  to  tin  and 
amalgamate  the  ends  of  the  conductors,  wiping  off  the  excess 
of  mercury.  The  surfaces  thus  prepared  are  always  ready  for 
a  good  and  perfect  contact. 

3181.  When  the  needle  has  taken  up  its  position  under  the 
earth's  influence,  and  the  copper  coil  is  adjusted  to  it,  the  needle 
ought  to  stand  at  true  zero,  and  appears  so  to  do.  When  that  is 
really  the  case,  equal  forces  applied  in  succession  on  opposite 
sides  of  the  needle  (by  two  contrary  currents  through  the  coil 
for  instance)  ought  to  deflect  the  needle  equally  on  both  sides, 
and  they  do  so.  But  sometimes,  when  the  needle  appears  to 
stand  at  zero,  it  may  not  be  truly  in  the  magnetic  meridian ; 
for  a  little  torsion  in  the  suspension  thread,  even  though  it  be 
only  10°  or  15°  (for  an  indifferent  needle),  and  quite  insensible 
to  the  eye  looking  at  the  magnetic  needle,  does  deflect  it,  and 
then  the  force  which  opposes  the  swing  of  the  needle,  and 
which  stops  and  returns  the  needle  towards  zero  (being  due 
both  to  the  torsion  and  the  earth's  force),  is  not  equal  on  the 
two  sides,  and  the  consequence  is,  that  the  extent  of  swing  in 
the  two  directions  is  not  equal  for  equal  powers,  but  is  greater 
on  one  side  than  the  other. 

3182.  I  have  not  yet  seen  a  galvanometer  which  has  an  ad- 
justment for  the  torsion  of  the  suspending  filament.  Also,  there 
may  be  other  causes,  as  the  presence  about  a  room,  in  its  walls 
and  other  places,  of  unknown  masses  of  iron,  which  may  render  the 
forces  on  opposite  sides  of  the  instrument  zero  unequal  in  a  slight 
degree ;  for  these  reasons  it  is  better  to  make  double  observations. 
All  the  phaenoraena  we  have  to  deal  with,  present  effects  in  two 
contrary  directions.  If  a  loop  pass  over  the  pole  of  a  magnet 
(3133.),  it  produces  a  swing  in  one  direction ;  if  it  be  taken 
away,  the  swing  is  in  the  other  direction ;  if  the  rectangles  and 


TAnes  of  magnetic  force.     [Series  XXIX. 

rings  to  be  described  (3192.)  be  rotated  one  way,  they  produce 
one  current;  if  the  contrary  way,  the  other  and  contrary  current 
IS  produced.  I  have  therefore,  always,  in  measuring  the  power  of 
a  pole  or  the  effect  of  a  revolving  intersecting  wire,  made  many 
observations  in  both  directions,  either  alternately  or  irregularly ; 
have  then  ascertained  the  average  of  those  on  the  one  side,  and 
,  also  on  the  other  (which  have  differed  in  different  cases  from  j^^th 
Tuo*^  P^^*^) ;  ^ind  have  then  taken  the  mean  of  these  averages 
as  the  expression  of  the  power  of  the  induced  electric  current,  or 
of  the  magnetic  forces  inducing  it.  . 

3183.  Care  must  be  taken  as  to  the  position  of  the  instrument 
and  apparatus  connected  M'ith  it,  in  relation  to  a  fire  or  sources 
of  different  temperatures,  that  parts  which  can  generate  thermo- 
currents  may  not  become  warmed  or  cooled  in  different  degrees. 
The  instrument  is  exceedingly  sensible  to  thermo-electric  cur- 
rents ;  the  accidental  falling  of  a  sun-beam  upon  one  of  two 
connecting  mercury  cups  for  a  few  moments  disturbed  the  indi- 
cations and  rendered  them  useless  for  some  time. 

3184.  In  order  to  ascertain  practically,  i.  e.  experimentally, 
the  comparative  value  of  degrees  in  different  parts  of  the  scale 
or  graduation  of  this  instrument  and  so  to  render  it  a  measurer, 
the  following  trials  were  made.  A  loop  like  that  before  de- 
scribed (3133.),  fig.  2,  was  connected  with  the  galvanometer  by 


Fig.  2. 


communications  which  removed  the  loop  9  feet  from  the  instru- 
ment, and  it  was  then  fixed.  A  compound  bar-magnet  con- 
sisting of  two  plates,  each  12  inches  long,  1  inch  broad,  and 
0*5  in  thickness,  was  selected  of  such  strength  as  to  lift  a  bunch 
of  clean  iron  filings,  averaging  45  grains  at  either  extremity. 
Blocks  were  arranged  at  the  loop,  so  that  this  magnet,  held  in  a 
vertical  position,  could  have  one  end  passed  downwards  through 
the  loop  until  the  latter  coincided  with  the  equator  of  the  mag- 
net (3191.);  after  which  it  could  be  quickly  removed  and  the 
same  operation  be  repeated  at  pleasure.  When  the  magnet  was 
thus  moved,  the  loop  being  unconnected  (at  one  of  the  mercury 
cups)  with  the  galvanometer,  there  was  no  sensible  change  of 


Dec.  1851.]  Galvanometer  indications. 


375 


place  in  the  needles ;  the  direct  influence  of  the  magnet  at  this 
distance  of  9  feet  being  too  small  for  such  an  effect. 

3185.  It  must  be  well  understood,  that,  in  all  the  observations 
made  with  this  instrument,  the  swing  is  observed  and  counted 
as  the  effect  produced,  unless  otherwise  expressed.  A  constant 
current  in  an  instrument  will  give  a  constant  and  continued 
deflection,  but  such  is  not  the  case  here.  The  currents  observed 
are  for  short  periods,  and  they  give,  as  it  were,  a  blow  or  push 
to  the  needle,  the  effect  of  which,  in  swinging  the  needle,  con- 
tinues to  increase  the  extent  of  the  deflection  long  after  the  cur- 
rent is  over.  Nevertheless  the  extent  of  the  swing  is  dependent 
on  the  electricity  which  passed  in  that  brief  current ;  and,  as 
the  experiments  seem  to  indicate,  is  simply  proportional  to  it, 
whether  the  electricity  pass  in  a  longer  or  a  shorter  time  (3104.), 
and  notwithstanding  the  comparative  variability  of  the  current 
in  strength  during  the  time  of  its  continuance. 

3186.  The  compound  bar  being  introduced  once  into  the  loop 
and  left  there,  the  swing  at  the  galvanometer  was  observed  and 
found  to  be  16°;  the  galvanometer  needle  was  then  brought  to 
zero,  and  the  bar  removed,  which  gave  a  reverse  current  and 
swing,  and  this  also  was  16°.  Many  alternations,  as  before 
described,  gave  16°  as  the  mean  result,  i.  e.  the  result  of  one 
intersection  of  the  lines  of  force  of  this  magnet  (3102.).  In 
order  to  comprehend  the  manner  in  which  the  effect  of  two  or 
more  intersections  of  these  lines  of  force  were  added  together, 
it  should  be  remembered  that  a  swing  of  the  needle  from  right 
to  left  occupied  some  time  (13  seconds) ;  so  that  one  is  able  to 
introduce  the  magnet  into  the  loop,  then  break  the  electric  cir- 
cuit by  raising  one  end  of  the  communicating  wire  out  of  the 
mercury,  remove  the  magnet,  which  by  this  motion  does  nothing, 
restore  the  mercury  contact,  and  reintroduce  the  magnet  into 
the  loop,  before  a  tenth  part  of  the  time  has  passed,  during 
which  the  needles,  urged  by  the  first  impulse,  would  swing. 
In  this  way  two  impulses  could  be  added  together,  and  their 
joint  effect  on  the  needle  observed ;  and,  indeed,  by  practice,  three 
and  even  four  impulses  could  be  given  within  the  needful  time, 
i.  e.  within  one-half  or  two-thirds  of  the  time  of  the  full  swing ; 
but  of  course  the  latter  impulses  would  have  less  power  upon 
the  needles,  because  these  would  be  more  or  less  obhque  to  the 


376 


Lines  of  magnetic  force.     [Series  XXIX. 


current  in  the  copper  coil  at  the  time  when  the  impulses  were 
given.  There  can  be  no  doubt,  that,  as  regarded  the  currents 
induced  in  the  loop  by  the  magnet,  they  would  be  equal  on  every 
introduction  of  the  same  magnet. 

3187.  Proceeding  in  this  way  I  obtained  results  for  one, 
two,  three,  and  even  four  introductions  with  the  same  magnet. 

o 

One  introduction  15 

Two  introductions  .  .  .  .  31*25 
Three  introductions  ....  46*87 
Four  introductions    ....  58*50 

Here  the  approximation  to  1,  2,  3, 4  cannot  escape  observation  ^ ; 
and  I  may  remark,  that,  whilst  observing  the  place  attained  at 
the  end  of  a  swing  which  is  retained  only  for  an  instant,  some 
degree  of  error  must  creep  in ;  and  that  that  error  must  be 
greatest,  in  the  first  number,  where  it  falls  altogether  upon  the 
unit  of  comparison,  than  in  the  other  observations,  where  only 
one -half  or  one-third  of  it  is  added  to  a  half  or  a  third  of  the 
whole  result.  Thus,  if  we  halve  the  arc  for  two  introductions 
of  the  pole,  it  gives  15°*625  ;  if  we  take  the  third  of  that  for  three 
introductions,  it  gives  15°*61 ;  — numbers  which  are  almost  iden- 
tical, so  that  if  the  first  number  was  increased  by  only  0°*6,  the 
proportion  would  be  as  1,  2  and  3.  The  reason  why  the  fourth, 
which  is  14°*625,  is  less,  may  perhaps  be  referred  to  the  cause 
already  assigned,  namely,  the  declination  distance  of  the  needle 
from  the  coil  when  that  impulse  was  given  (3186.). 

3188.  In  order  to  avoid  in  some  degree  this  case,  and  to  com- 
pare the  degrees  at  the  beginning  of  the  scale,  which  are  most 
important  for  the  comparison  of  future  experiments  with  one 

1  See  note  to  (3189.) 

sin  —  =sin  7  30   =-130526  -130326 

2 

sinH^=sinl5*625  =  sin  15  37-5  =-269200  =-134600 
2  2 

sinl^=  sin 23*435  =  sin 23  26-1  =-3976818       ^^'^f^^  =-1328606 
2  3 

sin^^  =sin29-25  =sin27  15    ='4886212  =-1221553 
2  4 


Dec.  1851.]  Galvanometer  indications.  377 

another,  I  took  only  one  of  the  bars  of  the  compound  magnet 
employed  above  (3184.).    The  results  were  as  follows : — 

o 

One  introduction  8 

Two  introductions  15*75 

Three  introductions  ....  23*87 
Four  introductions  31*66 

which  immbers  are  very  closely  as  1,  2,  3  and  4.  If  we  divide 
as  before,  we  have  8°,  7°-87,  7°-95,  7°-91 ;  so  that  if  only  0*09 
be  subtracted  from  the  first  observation,  or  8°,  it  leaves  that 
simple  result^. 

3189.  Hence  it  appears,  that  in  this  mode  of  applying  and 
measuring  the  magnetic  powers,  the  number  of  degrees  of  swing 
deflection  are  for  small  arcs  nearly  proportional  to  the  magnetic 
force  which  has  been  brought  into  action  on  the  moving  wire^. 

3190.  I  have  found  the  needles  very  constant  in  their  strength 
for  days  and  weeks  together.  By  care,  the  constancy  of  their 
state  for  a  day  is  easily  secured,  and  that  is  all  that  is  required 
in  comparative  experiments.    Those  which  I  have  in  use  weigh 

>  sin-1   =sin  4  =-0697565  -0697565 

2 

smi2_i?=sin  7-875=sin  7  52-5= -1370123  =-0685061 
2  ^ 

sin?^=sinll-935=8inll  56-l=-2068019  2068019_.Qgg 
2  3 

8in^i^=sin  15*83  =sin  15  49*8=*2727840       HZ?Z^= -0681960 
2  4 

2  Mr.  Christie  has  recalled  my  attention  to  a  paper  in  the  Philosophical 
Transactions,  1833,  p.  95,  in  which  he  has  investigated,  at  p.  Ill,  &c.,  the 
eflfect  of  what  may  be  called  magneto-electric  impulses  in  deflecting  the  mag- 
netic needle.  He  found  that  the  velocity  of  the  projection  of  the  needle,  which 
is  a  measure  of  the  force  acting  upon  it  at  the  instant  of  its  moving,  will  be 
proportional  to  the  sine  of  half  the  arc  of  swing.  My  statement,  therefore, 
would  as  a  geueral  expression  be  erroneous ;  but  for  small  arcs  the  results  as 
given  by  it  are  not  far  from  the  truth.  The  error  does  not  interfere  with  the 
general  reasoning  and  conclusions  of  the  paper ;  and  as  the  numbers  are  the 
results  of  experiment,  which,  though  made  with  a  first  and  therefore  rough 
apparatus,  were  still  made  with  some  care,  and  are  expressed  simply  as  de- 
flections, I  prefer  their  appearance  as  they  are  rather  than  in  an  altered  state. 
Mr.  Christie  has  been  so  kind  as  to  give  me  the  true  expression  of  force  for 
many  of  the  cases,  and  I  have  inserted  the  results  as  foot-notes  where  the 
cases  occur. — Jan.  26,  1852. 


7-50 

7-  74 

8-  16 

7-75 

6-50 


378         Lines  of  terrestrial  magnetic  force.    [Series  XXIX. 

with  their  axis  and  indicating  wire  9  grains ;  and  when  out  of 
the  copper  coil  vibrate  to  and  fro  once  in  26  seconds. 

3191.  With  this  instrument  thus  examined,  I  repeated  most 
of  the  experiments  with  loops  formerly  described  (3133.  &c.), 
with  the  same  results  as  before.  It  was  also  ascertained  that 
the  equator  of  a  regular  bar-magnet  w^as  the  place  at  which  the 
loop  should  be  arrested,  to  produce  the  maximum  action ;  and 
that  if  it  came  short  of,  or  passed  beyond  that  place,  the  final 
result  was  less.  Employing  a  magnet  12  inches  long,  when  the 
loop  passed  ^ 

2*3  inches  over  the  pole  the  deflection  was    .    .    .    5 '91 

4-1  inches  over  the  pole  the  deflection  was  . 

5*1  inches  over  the  pole  the  deflection  was  . 

6-1  inches  over  the  pole  the  deflection  was  . 

8-  0  inches  over  the  pole  the  deflection  was  . 

9-  0  inches  over  the  pole  the  deflection  was  . 

f  ii.  Revolving  Rectangles  and  RingsK 
3192.  The  form  of  moving  wire  which  I  have  adopted  for 
experiments  with  the  magnetic  forces  of  the  earth  (3177-)j 
either  that  of  a  rectangle  or  a  ring.    If  a  wire  rectangle  (fig.  3) 
be  placed  in  a  plane,  perpendicular  to  the  ^.  ^ 

dip  and  then  turned  once  round  the  axis 
a  b,  the  two  parts  cd  and  ef  will  twice  in- 
tersect the  lines  of  magnetic  force  within  ^ 
the  area  cedf.    In  the  first  1 80°  of  revolu- 
tion the  contrary  direction  in  w^hich  the  two 
parts  c  d  and  e  f  intersect  those  lines,  will 
cause  them  to  conspire  in  producing  one  current,  tendmg  to 
run  round  the  rectangle  (161)  in  a  given  direction;  m  the  fol- 
lowing 180°  of  revolution  they  will  combine  m  their  effect  to 
produce  a  contrary  current;  so  that  if  the  first  current  is  from 

1  A  friend  has  pointed  out  to  me  that  in  July  1832,  Nobili  made  experi- 
ments with  rotating  rings  or  spirals  subject  to  the  earth's  magnetic  influence ; 
thev  were  subsequent  to  and  consequent  upon  my  own  experiments  upon 
swineing  wires  (171.  148.)  and  revolving  globes  (160.)  of  January  1832  ;  but 
he  extended  the  considerations  to  the  tkichiess  of  the  wire;  the  diametei-  of 
the  spirals  and  the  number  of  the  spirals  dependent  upon  the  length  of  the  wire. 
The  results  (tabulated)  v^ill  be  found  in  vol.  i.  page  244,  &c.  of  the  Florence 
edition  of  his  Me'moires.— March  1.  1852. 


Dec.  1851.]       Revolving  rectangle  apparatus.  379 

by  c  e  and  /  to  again,  the  second  will  be  from  dhy  fe  and 
c  to  d.  If  the  rectangle,  instead  of  being  closed,  be  open  at  b, 
and  the  ends  there  produced  be  connected  with  a  commutator, 
which  changes  sides  when  the  rectangle  comes  into  the  plane 
perpendicular  to  the  dip,  i.  e.  at  every  half  revolution,  then  these 
successive  currents  can  be  gathered  up  and  sent  on  to  the  gal- 
vanometer to  be  measured.  The  parts  c  e  and  df  of  the  rect- 
angle may  be  looked  upon  simply  as  conductors ;  for  as  they  do 
not  in  their  motion  intersect  any  of  the  lines  of  force,  so  they  do 
not  tend  to  produce  any  current. 

3193.  The  apparatus  which  carries  these  rectangles,  and  is 
also  the  commutator  for  changing  the  induced  currents,  consists 
of  two  uprights,  fixed  on  a  wooden  stand,  and  carrying  above  a 
wooden  horizontal  axle,  one  end  of  which  is  furnished  with  a 
handle,  whilst  the  other  projects,  and  is  shaped  as  in  fig.  4.  It 
may  there  be  seen,  that  two  semicylindrical  plates  of  copper  a  b 
are  fixed  on  the  axle,  forming  a  cyhnder  round  it,  except  that 
they  do  not  touch  each  other  at  their  edges,  which  therefore 
leave  two  lines  of  separation  on  opposite  sides  of  the  axle.  Two 
strong  copper  rods,  0*2  of  an  inch  in  diameter,  are  fixed  to 
the  lower  part  of  the  upright  c,  terminating  there  in  sockets 
with  screws  for  the  purpose 
of  receiving  the  ends  of  the  ^'S*  ** 

rods  proceeding  from  the  gal- 
vanometer cups  (3180.) :  in 
the  other  direction  the  rods 
rise  up  parallel  to  each  othei*, 
and  being  perfectly  straight, 
press  strongly  against  the 
curved  plates  of  the  commu- 
tator on  opposite  sides ;  the 
consequence  is,  that,  whenever  in  the  rotation  of  the  axle,  the 
Unes  of  separation  between  the  commutator  plates  arrive  at 
and  pass  the  horizontal  plane,  their  contact  with  these  bearing 
rods  is  changed,  and  consequently  the  direction  of  the  current 
proceeding  from  these  plates  to  the  rods,  and  so  on  to  the  gal- 
vanometer, is  changed  also.  The  other  or  outer  ends  of  the 
commutator  plates  are  tinned,  for  the  purpose  of  being  connected 
by  soldering  to  the  ends  of  any  rectangle  or  ring  which  is  to  be 
subjected  to  experiment. 


380         Lines  of  terrestrial  magnetic  force.    [Series  XXIX. 


3194.  The  rectangle  itself  is  tied  on  to  a  slight  wooden  cross 
(fig.  5),  which  has  a  socket  on  one  arm  that  slides  on  to  and 
over  the  part  of  the  wooden  axle  projecting  ^ 
beyond  the  commutator  plates,  so  that  it  shall 
revolve  with  the  axle.    A  small  copper  rod  I  " 

forms  a  continuation  of  that  part  of  the  frame   j  j  

which  occupies  the  place  of  axle,  and  the  end  i  j 

of  this  rod  enters  into  a  hole  in  a  separate   j 

upright,  serving  to  support  and  steady  the 
rectangle  and  its  frame.    The  frames  are  of  two  or  three  sizes, 
so  as  to  receive  rectangles  of  12  inches  in  the  side,  or  even 
larger,  up  to  36  inches  square.    The  rectangle  is  adjusted  in  its 
place,  so  that  it  shall  be  in  the  horizontal  plane  when  the  divi- 
sion between  the  commutator  plates  is  in  the  same  plane,  and 
then  its  extremities  are  soldered  to  the  two  commutator  plates, 
one  to  each.     It  is  now  evident,  that  when  dealing  with  the 
lines  of  force  of  the  earth,  or  any  other  Unes,  the  axle  has  only 
to  be  turned  until  the  upright  copper  rods  touch  on  each  side  at 
the  separation  of  the  commutator  plates,  and  then  the  instrument 
adjusted  in  position,  so  that  the  plane  of  the  ring  or  rectangle  is 
perpendicular  to  the  direction  of  the  lines  of  force  which  are  to 
be  examined,  and  then  any  revolution  of  the  commutator  and 
intersecting  wire  will  produce  the  maximum  current  which  such 
wire  and  such  magnetic  force  can  produce.    The  Hues  of  ter- 
restrial magnetic  force  are  inclined  at  an  angle  of  69°  to  the 
horizontal  plane.    As,  however,  only  comparative  results  were 
required,  the  instrument  was,  in  all  the  ensuing  experiments, 
placed  in  the  horizontal  plane,  with  the  axis  of  rotation  perpen- 
dicular to  the  plane  of  the  magnetic  meridian ;  under  which  cir- 
cumstances no  cause  of  error  or  variation  was  introduced  into  the 
results.   As  no  extra  magnet  was  employed,  the  commutator  was 
placed  within  3  feet  of  the  galvanometer,  so  that  two  pieces  of 
copper  wire  3  feet  long  and  0-2  of  an  inch  in  thickness,  sufficed  to 
complete  the  communication.    One  end  of  each  of  these  dipped 
into  the  galvanometer  mercury  cups,  the  other  ends  were  tinned, 
amalgamated,  introduced  into  the  sockets  of  the  commutator 
rods  (3193.),  and  secured  by  the  pinching  screw  (fig.  4). 

3195.  When  a  given  length  of  wire  is  to  be  disposed  of  in  the 
form  best  suited  to  produce  the  maximum  effect,  then  the  cir- 
cumstances to  be  considered  are  contrary  for  the  case  of  a  loop 


Dec.  1851.]         Revolving  rectangles — time. 


381 


to  be  employed  with  a  small  magnet  (39.  3184.),  and  a  rect- 
angle or  other  formed  loop  to  be  employed  with  the  lines  of 
terrestrial  force.  In  the  case  of  the  small  magnet,  all  the  lines 
of  force  belonging  to  it  are  inclosed  by  the  loop ;  and  if  the  wire 
is  so  long  that  it  can  be  formed  into  a  loop  of  two  or  more  con- 
volutions, and  yet  pass  over  the  pole,  then  twice  or  many  times 
the  electricity  will  be  evolved  that  a  single  loop  can  produce  (36.). 
In  the  case  of  the  earth's  force,  the  contrary  result  is  true ;  for 
as  in  circles,  squares,  similar  rectangles,  &c.  the  areas  inclosed 
are  as  the  squares  of  the  periphery,  and  the  lines  of  force  inter- 
sected are  as  the  areas,  it  is  much  better  to  arrange  a  given 
wire  in  one  simple  circuit  than  in  two  or  more  convolutions. 
Twelve  feet  of  wire  in  one  square  intersects  in  one  revolution  the 
lines  of  force  passing  through  an  area  of  nine  square  feet,  whilst 
if  arranged  in  a  triple  circuit,  about  a  square  of  one  foot  area,  it 
will  only  intersect  the  lines  due  to  that  area ;  and  it  is  thrice  as 
advantageous  to  intersect  the  lines  within  nine  square  feet  once, 
as  it  is  to  intersect  those  of  one  square  foot  three  times. 

3196.  A  square  was  prepared,  containing  4  feet  in  length  of 
copper  wire  0*05  of  an  inch  in  diameter ;  it  inclosed  one  square 
foot  of  area,  and  was  mounted  on  the  commutator  and  connected 
in  the  manner  already  described  (3194.).  Six  revolutions  of  it 
produced  a  swing  deflection  of  14°  or  15°,  and  twelve  quick  re- 
volutions were  possible  within  the  required  time  (3104.).  The 
results  of  quick  and. slow  revolutions  were  first  compared.  Six 
slow  revolutions  gave  as  the  average  of  several  experiments  15°*5 
swing.  Six  moderate  revolutions  gave  also  an  average  of  15°'5  ; 
six  quick  revolutions  gave  an  average  of  15°*66.  At  another 
time  twelve  moderate  revolutions  gave  an  average  of  28°*75,  and 
twelve  quick  revolutions  gave  an  average  of  31°-33  swing.  As 
before  explained  (3186.),  the  probable  reason  why  the  quick 
revolutions  gave  a  larger  result  than  the  moderate  or  slow  revo- 
lutions is,  that  in  slow  time  the  later  revolutions  are  performed 
at  a  period  when  the  needle  is  so  far  from  parallel  with  the  cop- 
per coil  of  the  galvanometer,  that  the  impulses  due  to  them  are 
less  effectually  exerted.  Hence  a  small  or  moderate  number  of 
revolutions  and  a  quick  motion  is  best.  The  difference  in  the 
extreme  case  is  less  than  might  have  been  expected,  and  shows 
that  there  is  no  practical  objection  in  this  respect  to  the  method 
proposed  of  experimenting  with  the  lines  of  magnetic  force. 


382         Lines  of  terrestrial  magnetic  force.    [Series  XXIX. 

3197.  In  order  to  obtain  for  the  present  an  expression  of  the 
power  of  the  earth's  magnetic  force  by  this  rectangle,  observa- 
tions were  made  on  both  sides  of  zero,  as  already  recommended  - 
(3182.).    Nine  moderately  quick  direct  revolutions  (i.  e.  as  the 
hands  of  the  clock)  gave  as  the  average  of  many  experiments 
23°'87,  and  nine  reverse  revolutions  gave  23°'37 ;  the  mean  of 
these  is  23°-62  for  the  nine  revolutions  of  the  rectangle,  and 
therefore  2°-624  per  revolution.    Now  the  six  quick  revolutions 
(3196.)  gave  15°-66,  which  is  2°-61  per  revolution,  and  the 
twelve  quick  revolutions  gave  31°-33,  which  is  also  2°-61  per 
revolution;  and  these  results  of  2°-624,  2°-61,  and  2°-61,  are 
very  much  in  accordance,  and  give  great  confidence  m  this 
method  of  investigating  magnetic  forces  ^ 

3198.  A  rectangle  was  prepared  of  the  same  length  (4  feet)  of 
the  same  wire,  but  the  sides  were  respectively  8  and  16  inches 
(fig.  6),  so  that  when  revolving  the  in- 
tersecting parts  should  be  only  8  inches 
in  length  instead  of  12.    The  area  of  the 
rectangle  was  necessarily  128  square 
inches  instead  of  144.    This  rectangle 
showed  the  same  difference  of  quick  and 
slow  rotations  as  before  (3196.).    When  nine  direct  revolutions 
were  made,  the  result  was  20°-87  swing.    Nine  reverse  revolu- 
tions gave  an  average  of  20°-25  swing;  the  mean  is  20  -56,  or 
2°-284  per  revolution.    A  third  rectangle  was  prepared  of  the. 
same  length  and  kind  of  wire,  the  sides  of  which  were  respectively 
8  and  16  inches  long  (fig.  7),  but  now  so  revolved  that  the  in- 
tersecting parts  were  16  inches,  or  twice  as  long  as  before;  the 
area  of  the  rectangle  remained  the  same,  i.  e.  128  inches.  Ihe 
like  effect  of  slow  and  quick  revolutions  appeared  as  in  the  former 
cases  (3196. 3198.).   Nine  direct  revolutions  gave  as  the  average 
eff"ect  20"-75  ;  and  nine  reverse  revolutions  produced  21°'373  ; 
the  mean  is  21°-06,  or  2°-34  per  revolution. 


Fig.  6. 


Fig.  7. 


1 

r 


1  sini^rrsin  7-83  =sin  7  49-8=-1362343 
2 

.23-62  ^,;„iTSl  =sinll  48-6=  2047069 


sin 


sin 


31-33  -^inl5-665=3inl5  40   =  2700403 


1362343  ^.0227057 
6 

2047069  =-0227474 
9 

2700403  ^-0225034 
12 


Dec.  1851.]    Revolving  rectangles — effect  of  form.  383 


3199.  Now  2°'34  is  so  near  to  2°-284,  that  they  may  in  the 
present  state  of  the  investigation  be  considered  the  same.  The 
little  difference  that  is  evident,  was,  I  suspect,  occasioned  by 
centrifugal  power  throwing  out  the  middle  of  the  longer  inter- 
secting parts  during  the  revolution.  The  coincidence  of  the 
numbers  shows,  that  the  variation  in  the  arrangement  of  the 
rectangle  and  in  the  length  of  the  parts  of  the  wires  intersecting 
the  lines  of  magnetic  force,  have  had  no  influence  in  altering  the 
result,  which,  being  dependent  alone  on  the  number  of  lines  of 
force  intersected,  is  the  same  for  both;  for  the  area  of  the 
rectangles  is  the  same.  This  is  still  further  shown  by  comparing 
the  results  with  those  obtained  with  the  square.  The  area  in 
that  case  was  144  square  inches,  and  the  effect  per  revolution 
2°'61.  With  the  long  rectangles  the  area  is  128  square  inches, 
and  the  mean  of  the  two  results  is  2°'312  per  revolution.  Now 
144  square  inches  is  to  128  square  inches  as  2°'61  is  to 
2°*32;  a  result  so  near  to  2°'312  that  it  may  be  here  considered 
as  the  same;  proving  that  the  electric  current  induced  is 
directly  as  the  lines  of  magnetic  force  intersected  by  the  moving 


wire'. 


3200.  It  may  also  be  perceived  that  no  difference  is  produced 
when  the  lines  of  force  are  chiefly  disposed  in  the  direction  of 
the  motion  of  the  wire,  or  else,  chiefly  in  the  direction  of  the 
length  of  the  wire ;  i.  e.  no  alterations  are  occasioned  by  varia- 
tions in  the  velocity  of  the  motion,  or  of  the  length  of  the  wire, 
provided  the  amount  of  lines  of  magnetic  force  intersected  re- 
mains the  same. 

3201.  Having  a  square  on  the  frame  12  inches  in  the  side  but 
consisting  of  copper  wire  0-1  of  an  inch  in  thickness,  I  obtained 
the  average  result  of  many  observations  for  one,  two,  three,  four 
and  five  revolutions  of  the  wire. 

'  Oblong  rectangles  of  128  square .  inches  area  give  a  mean  of  20°-81  (3198.). 
The  rectangle  of  144  square  inches  gave  a  mean  of  23°-62  (3197.). 

•  20*81  °  o  I 

sin  -^  =  sin  10-405  =sin  10  24-3  =  -1806049 

•  2^-fi2 

=8in  11-81  =sin  11  48-6  =  -2047069 

•MM049^  .0225750 

]^J_        -1806049x9  =  1-6254441        Or  thus:  on/^nr-o 
144    9        •2047069x8  =  1-6376552  zu47Uba_^  -0227452 

9 


384         Lines  of  terrestrial  magnetic  force.    [Series  XXIX. 

One  revolution  gave   7       equal  to  7       per  revolution. 

Two  revolutions  gave  13-875  equal  to  6-937  per  revolution. 

Threerevolutionsgave  21-075  equal  to  7*025  per  revolution. 

Four  revolutions  gave  28-637  equal  to  7-159  per  revolution. 

Five  revolutions  gave  37-637  equal  to  7-527  per  revolution. 
These  results  are  exceedingly  close  upon  each  other,  especially 
for  the  first  30°,  and  confirm  several  of  the  conclusions  before 
drawn  (3189.  3199.)  as  to  the  indications  of  the  instrument,  the 
amount  of  the  curves,  &c.^ 

3202.  At  another  time  I  compared  the  effect  of  equable  revo- 
lutions with  other  revolutions  very  irregular  in  their  rates,  the 
motion  being  sometimes  even  backwards  and  contmually  ditter- 
ing  in  degree  by  fits  and  starts,  yet  always  so  that  withm  the 
proper  time  a  certain  number  of  revolutions  should  have  beeu 
completed.  The  rectangle  was  of  wire  0-2  of  an  inch  thick  ;  the 
mean  of  many  experiments,  which  were  closely  alike  in  their 
results,  gave  for  two  smooth,  equable  revolutions,  17  '5,  and 
also  for  two  irregular  uncertain  revolutions  the  same  amount  ot 
17°-5.  

3203.  The  relation  of  the  current  produced  to  the  mass  of  the 
wire  was  then  examined ;  a  relation,  which  has  been  mvestigated 
on  a  former  occasion  by  loops  and  small  magnets  (3133.).  J^or 
the  present  purpose  two  other  equal  squares  were  prepared,  each 
a  foot  in  the  side,  but  the  copper  wire  of  which  they  consisted 
was  respectively  O'l  and  0-2  of  an  inch  in  diameter;  so  that 


1  sinl 
2 

=  sin  °3-30 

Differences. 
=•0610485 

-0597381 

•0610485 

.  13-875 
sm  2 

=  sin  6-9375  = 

sin   6  56-25  =  •1207866 

-0620924 

■1207866  _ 
2 

•0603933 

.  21-075 
sin — - — 
2 

=  sin  10-5375  = 

si„  10  32-25  =  -1828790^^^^^^^^ 

•1828790 _ 
3 

•0609596 

.  28-637 
sm_- 

=  sin  14-3185  = 

sin  14  19-11  =  -2473119 

•0752595 

•2473n9_ 
4 

•0618279 

.  37-637 
sm  2 

=  sin  18-8185  = 

sin  18  49-11  =  -3225714 

•3225714 _ 
5 

•0645142 

2  See  a 

corresponding 

investigation  by  Christie.  Philosophical 

Transac- 

tions,  1833,  p.  120. 


Dec.  1851.]    Muvbiy  rectangles — mass  of  the  wire. 


385 


with  the  former  rectangle  they  formed  a  series  of  three,  having 
the  same  size,  shape  and  area,  but  the  masses  of  the  moving 
wire  increasing  in  the  proportion  of  one,  four  and  sixteen. 
When  the  rectangle  of  0*1  wire  was  employed,  six  direct  revolu- 
tions gave  an  average  result  of  41°*75,  and  six  to  the  left  gave 
46°*25  ;  the  mean  of  the  two  is  44°,  and  this  divided  by  six 
gives  7°*33  as  the  deflection  per  revolution.  Again,  three  direct 
revolutions  gave  20°*  12,  and  three  reverse  revolutions  23°-l ;  the 
mean  being  21°*61,  and  the  deflection  per  revolution  7°*20. 
This  is  very  close  to  the  former  result  with  six  revolutions,  namely 
7°'33,  and  is  a  large  increase  upon  the  effect  of  the  rectangle  of 
wii'e  0"05  in  diameter,  namely  2°"61 ;  nevertheless,  it  is  not  as 
4:1;  nor  could  such  a  result  be  expected,  inasmuch  as  the  mass 
of  the  chief  conductor  remained  the  same  (3137.)'  When  the 
results  are  compared  with  those  made  with  like  wires  in  the 
form  of  loops,  they  are  found  to  be  exceedingly  close ;  in  that 
case  the  results  were  as  16^  to  44°'4  (3136.),  which  would  accord 
with  a  ratio  in  the  present  case  of  2°'61  to  7°'26 ;  and  it  is  as 
2°-61  to  7°'242,  almost  identical. 

3204.  The  average  of  the  direct  and  reverse  revolutions  is 
seen  above  to  differ  considerably,  i.  e.  up  to  4°  and  5°  in  the 
higher  case.  This  does  not  indicate  any  error  in  principle,  but 
results  simply  from  the  circumstance,  that  when  the  needles 
were  quiescent  in  the  galvanometer,  they  stood  a  little  on  one 
side  of  zero  (3182.).  I  did  not  wish  to  adjust  the  instrument 
at  the  time,  as  1  was  watching  for  spontaneous  alterations  of  the 
zero  place,  and  prefer  giving  the  numbers  as  they  came  out  in 
the  investigation,  to  any  pen-and-ink  correction  of  the  notes. 

3205.  The  third  square  of  0*2  wire  gave  such  large  swings, 
that  I  employed  only  a  small  number  of  revolutions.  Three 
direct  revolutions  gave  an  average  of  25°'58 ;  three  reverse  re- 
volutions gave  28°*5  ;  the  mean  is  27°"04,  and  the  amount  per 
revolution  9°'01.  Again,  two  direct  revolutions  gave  17°*5 ; 
two  reverse  revolutions  gave  18°;  the  mean  is  17°'75,  and  the 
amount  per  revolution  8°'87  ;  the  mean  of  the  two  final  results 
is  8°"94,  and  is  again  an  increase  on  the  effect  produced  by  the 
preceding  rectangle  of  wire,  only  half  the  diameter  of  the  present. 
This  thickness  of  wire  was  also  employed  formerly  as  a  loop 
(3136.) ;  and  if  we  compare  the  results  then  obtained  with  the 
present  results,  it  is  remarkable  how  near  they  approach  to  each 

VOL.  III.  2  o 


386        Lines  of  terrestrial  magnetic  force.    [Series  XXIX. 

other ;  a  circumstance  which  leads  to  great  confidence  in  the 
principles  and  practice  of  both  forms  of  exammation.  When 
wires  having  masses  in  the  proportion  of  1,  4  and  16  were  em- 
ployed as  loops,  the  currents  indicated  by  the  galvanometer 
were  as  I'OO,  2-77,  and  3-58;  now  that  they  are  employed  as 
rectangles  subject  to  the  earth's  magnetic  power,  they  are  as 
1-00,  2-78,  and  3-45  ^ 

3206.  I  formed  a  square,  12  inches  in  the  side,  of  four  convo- 
lutions of  copper  wire  0-05  of  an  inch  in  diameter;  the  smgle 
wire  which  formed  it  was  consequently  16  feet  long.    Such  a 
rectangle  will,  in  revolving,  intersect  the  same  number  of  hues 
of  magnetic  force  as  the  former  rectangle  made  with  wn^e  0  1m 
diameter  (3203.) :  there  will  also  be  the  same  mass  of  wire  m- 
tersecting  the  lines,  but,  as  a  conductor,  the  first  .vire  has  in 
respect  of  diameter,  only  one-fourth  the  conducting  power  of  the 
second;  and  then,  to  increase  the  obstruction,  it  is  four  times  as 
long.    Six  direct  revolutions  gave  an  average  result  of  20  6, 
and  six  reverse  revolutions  19-7 ;  the  mean  is  20-15,  and  the 
proportion  per  revolution  3-36.    With  the  other  rectangle 
LXg  equal  area  and  mass,  but  a  single  wire  (3203.),  the  result 
per  revolution  was  7°-26;  being  above,  though  near  upon  twice 
L  much  as  in  the  present  case.    Hence  for  such  an  ex^ellen 
conducting  galvanometer  as  that  described   312o.  3178.),  the 
moving  Mdre^had  better  be  as  one  single  thick  wire  rather  than 
Z  mafy  convolutions  of  a  thin  one.    If  it  be,  under  all  varia- 
tions of  circumstances,  the  same  wire  for  the  same  area,  then,  of 
course,  two  or  more  convolutions  are  better  than  one. 


•2337848  _ 
2 


•0779283.   The  square  12  inches  side,  of  wire  0-05  in  diameter,  gave  for  six 

revolutions  (3196.  3197-)  -0227057  as  sin  \  A  for  one  revolution.    A  like 

•3225714   

square  of  wire  Q-IO  in  diameter  gave  for  five  revolutions  (3021.)  

•06451428  as  sin  1  A  for  one  revolution.  A  like  square  of  wire  0-20  in  diameter 
2 

gave  -0779283  as  sin  i  A  for  one  revolution. 

•06451428_„.j,,i  ;0779283_3.^32^ 
-^0227^  -0227057 


Dec.  1851.]    Revolving  rectangles— thin  and  tfiick  wire.  38/ 

3207-  It  was  to  be  expected,  however,  that  the  thin  wire  rect- 
angle would  produce  a  current  of  more  intensity  than  that  in  the 
thick  wire,  though  less  in  quantity;  and  to  prove  this  point  ex- 
perimentally, I  connected  the  two  rectangles  in  succession  with 
Rhumkorff's  galvanometer  (3086.),  having  wire  only  l-135th  of 
an  inch  in  diameter.    That  of  the  single  thick  wire  now  gave 
only  1°"66  of  sv\dng  for  twelve  revolutions  of  the  rectangle,  or 
0°*138  per  revolution ;  whilst  the  other  of  four  convolutions  of 
thin  wire  gave  for  twelve  revolutions  7°'33,  or  0°'61  per  revolu- 
tion.   Now  the  needles  of  the  two  instruments  were  not  very 
different  in  weight  and  other  circumstances,  so  that  without 
pretending  to  an  accurate  comparison,  we  may  still  perceive  an 
immense  falling-off  in  both  cases,  due  to  the  obstruction  of  the 
fine  wire  in  the  Rhumkorff's  galvanometer  ;  for  the  thick  wire  it 
is  from  7°-26  to  0°-138,  and  for  the  thin  wire  from  3°-36  to 
0^-610.    Still  the  thin  wire  rectangle  has  lost  far  less  propor- 
tionately in  power  than  the  other ;  and  by  this  galvanometer  is 
above  four  times  greater  in  effect  than  the  rectangle  of  thicker 
wire.    Of  the  thick  wire  effect  less  than  ^fiftieth  passes  the  fine 
wire  galvanometer,  all  the  rest  is  stopped  ;  of  the  fine  wire  effect 
more  than  ten  times  this  proportion,  or  between  a  fourth  and  a 
fifth  (because  of  the  higher  intensity  of  the  current),  surmounts 
the  obstruction  presented  by  the  instrument.    The  quantity  of 
electricity  which  really  passes  through  the  fine  wire  galvanometer 
is  of  course  far  less  than  in  the  proportion  indicated  above.  The 
thick  wire  coil  makes  at  the  utmost  four  convolutions  about  the 
needles,  whereas  in  the  fine  ware  coil  there  are  probably  four 
hundred  or  more;  so  that  the  electricity  which  really  travels 
forward  as  a  current,  is  probably  not  a  hundredth  part  of  that 
which  would  be  required  to  give  an  equal  deflection  in  the  thick 
wire  galvanometer.    Such  a  circumstance  does  not  disturb  the 
considerations  with  respect  to  the  relative  intensity  of  the 
magneto-electric  currents  from  the  two  rectangles,  which  have 
been  stated  above. 

3208.  A  large  square  was  now  constructed  of  copper  wire  0°*2 
of  an  inch  in  diameter.  The  square  was  36  inches  in  the  side, 
and  therefore  consisted  of  12  feet  of  wire,  and  inclosed  an  area  of 
9  square  feet ;  it  was  attached  to  the  commutator  by  expedients, 
which,  though  sufficient  for  the  present,  were  not  accurate  in  the 
adjustments.    It  produced  a  fine  effect  upon  the  thick  wire 

2  c  2 


388         Lines  of  terrestrial  magnetic  force.    [Series  XXIX. 

galvanometer  (3178.);  for  one  revolution  caused  a  swing  de- 
flection of  80°  or  more ;  and  when  its  rotation  was  contmuous  the 
needles  were  permanently  deflected  40°  or  50°.    It  was  very  m- 
terestino-to  see  how,  when  this  rectangle  commenced  its  motion 
from  the  horizontal  plane,  the  current  increased  in  its  intensity 
and  then  diminished  again,  the  needles  showing,  that  whilst  the 
first  10°  or  20°  of  revolution  were  being  passed,  there  was  very 
little  power  exerted  on  them ;  but  that  when  it  was  towards  or 
near  the  90°,  the  power  was  great ;  the  wires  then  intersecting  the 
lines  of  force  nearly  at  right  angles,  and  therefore,  with  an  equal 
velocity,  crossing  the  greatest  number  in  a  given  time     It  was 
also  very  interesting,  by  the  same  indications,  to  see  the  two  chief 
impulses  (3192.)  given  in  one  revolution  of  the  rectangle.  Being 
large  and  massive  in  proportion  to  the  former  wires,  more  time 
was  required  forarotation  than  before,  and  the  point  of  ^^m.  or 
velocity  of  rotation  became  more  essential.    One  rotation  in  a 
second  was  as  much  as  I  could  well  produce.    A  speed  somewha 
less  than  this  was  easy,  convenient  and  quick  enough ;  it  gave 
for  a  single  revolution  near  80°,  whilst  a  revolution  with  one-halt 
or  one-third  the  velocity,  or  less,  gave  only  60°,  50°,  or  even 
smaller  amounts  of  deflection. 

3009  Observations  were  now  made  on  the  measurement  of 
one^rotation  having  an  easy  quick  velocity.    The  average  of 
fifteen  observations  to  the  right,  which  came  very  near  to  each 
other  was  78°-846 ;  the  average  of  seventeen  simdar  observa- 
tions to  the  left  was  78°-382  ;  and  the  mean  of  these  results,  or 
78-6 14,  I  believe  to  be  a  good  first  expression  for  this  rectangle 
On  measuring  the  distances  across  after  this  result,  I  found  that 
in  one  direction,  i.  e.  across  between  the  intersecting  portions  of 
wire,  it  was  rather  less  than  36  inches;  having  therefore  cor- 
rect d  this  error,  I  repeated  the  observations  and  obtained  the 
result  of  81-44.    The  difference  of  2°-83,  I  beheve  to  be  a  true 
esu    of  the  alteration  and  increase  of  the  area  on  making  it 
Ze  accurately  9  square  feet;  and  it  is  to  me  an  evidence  of 
the  sensibility  and  certainty  of  the  instrument. 

321o!  As  the  two  impulses  upon  the  needles  in  one  revolution 
f 3208  )  are  here  sensibly  apart  in  time,  and  as  the  needle  has  as 
t  dently  and  necessarily  left  its  first  place  before  the  second 
impulse  is  impressed  upon  it,  so,  that  second  impulse  cannot  be 
o  effectual  as' the  first'    T  therefore  observed  the  results  with 


Dec.  1851.]    Revolving  rectangles — different  ureas. 


389 


half  a  revolution,  and  obtained  a  mean  of  41°'37  for  the  effect. 
This  number  evidently  belongs  to  the  first  of  the  two  impulses  of 
one  revolution  and  if  we  subtract  it  Irom  81°-44,  it  gives  40°-07 
as  the  value  of  the  second  impulse  under  the  changed  place  of 
the  needle.  This  difference  of  the  two  impulses  of  one  revolu- 
tion, namely  41°-37  and  40°-07,  is  in  perfect  accordance  with 
the  results  that  were  to  be  expected. 

3211.  The  square  of  this  same  copper  wire,  0*2  in  thickness, 
employed  on  a  former  occasion  (3205.),  had  an  area  of  one  square 
foot,  so  that  then  the  Hnes  of  force  affected  or  affecting  the 
moving  wire,  were  one-ninth  part  of  what  they  are  in  the  present 
case :  the  effect  then  was  8°-94  per  revolution.  If,  in  comparing 
these  cases,  we  take  the  ninth  part  of  Sl°-44,  it  gives  9°'04;  a 
number  so  near  the  former,  that  we  may  consider  the  two  rect- 
angles as  proving  the  same  result,  and  at  the  same  time  the 
truth  of  the  statement,  that  the  magneto-electric  current  evolved 
is  as  the  amount  of  lines  of  force  intersected.  A  ninth  part  of 
the  result  with  the  large  rectangle  (78°'614),  before  its  area  was 
corrected,  is  8°'734 ;  so  that  the  one  is  above  and  the  other  below 
the  amount  of  the  12-inch  rectangle.  As  that  was  not  very 
carefully  adjusted,  nor  indeed  any  of  the  arrangements  made  as 
yet  with  extreme  accuracy,  I  have  little  doubt  that  with  accu- 
rately adjusted  rectangles  the  results  would  be  strictly  propor- 
tional to  the  areas  ^ 


3212.  The  moving  wire,  in  place  of  being  formed  into  a  rect- 
angle, may  be  adjusted  as  a  ring ;  and  then  the  advantage  is 
obtained  of  the  largest  area  which  a  given  length  of  wire  can  in- 

'  The  9  square  teet  rectangle  gave  81°-44  sin  ii-if  =  sin  4072  =  sin  40° 

2 

43'-2=  -6523630:  or  taking  4)°-3r  for  the  half  revolution  for  —A  (3210.)  ' 

2 

sin  41°-37  =  sin  41°  22'-2  =  -6609190,  which  divided  by  nine  give  -073435  as 
the  force  per  square  foot.  The  1  square  foot  rectangle  of  like  wire  (3205.) 
gave  -07714,  or  -07793  as  the  force  of  one  revolution  ;  the  first  of  which  is 
•00370  more  than  -i-  of  the  measure  of  the  effect  of  the  large  square ;  the 
difference  being  about  ~  of  -07714,  or  the  whole  force  of  one  revoluiton. 


390         Lines  of  terrestrial  magnetic  force.    [Series  XXIX. 

close,  and  therefore  for  a  uniform  wire,  the  obstruction  to  the 
induced  current,  as  respects  its  conduction,  is  the  least.  Small 
rings  of  one  or  several  convolutions  will  probably  be  very  valuable 
in  the  examination  of  small  and  local  magnets  under  different 
circumstances.    One  consisting  of  ten  spirals  of  copper  wire 
0-032  of  an  inch  in  diameter,  containing  49  inches,  in  a  ring 
about  1-5  inch  in  diameter,  gave  but  small  results  under  the 
earth's  influence;  but  when  brought  near  a  horseshoe  magnet 
told,  in  its  effects  for  every  difference  in  distance  or  m  position. 
A  single  ring  4  inches  in  diameter,  being  made  of  a  convolution 
of  copper  wire  0-2  in  thickness,  was  employed  with  the  earth  s 
magnetic  force  as  before;  it  gave  as  the  average  of  six  revolu- 
tions many  times  repeated  5°-995,  or  0°-999  per  revolution. 
For  twelve  revolutions  it  gave  a  mean  of  12°-375  or  I'^'OSl  per 
revolution  •  ;  the  mean  of  the  two  results  with  such  different 
numbers  of  revolutions  being  1°.    Another  ring,  consisting  of 
26  convolutions  of  copper  wire  0-04  of  an  inch  in  diameter,  was 
constructed  and  had  a  mean  diameter  of  3-6  or  3-7  mches ;  it 
contained  300  inches  in  length  of  wire.    So  the  masses  of  the 
metal  in  the  two  rings  are  nearly  the  same,  but  the  latter  wire 
is  singly  only  l-25th  of  the  mass  of  the  former.    It  gave  for 
twelve  revolutions  a  mean  of  6°-25,  or  0°-52  per  revolution. 
With  the  earth's  power  and  the  thick  wire  galvanometer,  it  gave 
therefore  little  more  than  half  the  result  of  the  single  thick  wire 
ring     We  know  from  former  considerations  (3206.),  that  it  the 
300  inches  had  been  made  into  one  single  ring,  it  would  have 
given  a  very  high  effect  compared  to  the  present.  ^ 

3213.  The  application  of  the  principle  of  the  movmg  wire  in 
the  form  of  a  revolving  rectangle,  makes  the  investigation  of  cotl- 
ducting  power,  and  the  results  produced  by  difference  m  the 
nature  of  the  substance,  or  in  diameter,  i.  e.  mass,  or  in  length, 
very  easy ;  and  the  obstruction  offered  by  those  parts  which 
moving  n^t  across  but  parallel  to  the  lines  of  force  (3071.),  l-ve 
no  exciting  action  but  perform  the  part  of  conductors  merely, 
might  be  greatly  removed  by  making  them  massive.  I  hey 
might  be  made  to  shift  upon  the  axle  so  as  to  bear  adjustment 


1  sin  i££i=siu  2-9975=  sin  2  59'85= 

2i 


-0522925 


,i„i2::^=sin  6-1875=  B.n  6  . 125=  1077825  •l^=-05389.2 
2 


Deo.  1851.]       Forces  of  associated  magnets.  391 

for  different  lengths  of  wires,  and  the  commutator  might  in  fact 
be  made  to  a  large  extent  a  general  instrument. 

3214.  In  looking  forward  to  further  applications  of  the  prin- 
ciple of  the  moving  wire,  it  does  not  seem  at  all  unlikely  that  by 
increased  delicacy  and  perfection  of  the  instrument,  by  increased 
velocity,  by  continued  motion  for  a  time  in  one  direction  and 
then  reversal  of  the  revolution  with  the  reversal  of  the  direction 
of  the  swing,  &c.,  it  may  be  applied  with  advantage  hereafter  to 
the  investigation  of  the  earth's  magnetic  force  in  different  lati- 
tudes and  places.  To  obtain  the  maximum  effect,  the  axis  of 
rotation  must  be  perpendicular  to  the  lines  of  force,  i.  e.  the  dip. 
It  would  even  be  possible  to  search  for  the  direction  of  the  lines 
of  force,  or  the  dip,  by  making  the  axis  of  rotation  variable  about 
the  line  of  dip,  adjusting  it  in  two  directions  until  there  was  no 
action  at  the  galvanometer,  and  then  observing  the  position  of 
the  axis ;  a  double  commutator  would  be  required  corresponding 
to  the  lines  of  adjustment,  but  that  is  an  instrument  of  very 
simple  construction. 

§  36.  On  the  amount  and  general  disposition  of  the  Forces  of  a 
Magnet  when  associated  with  other  magnets. 

3215.  Prior  to  further  progress  in  the  experimental  develop- 
ment by  a  moving  wire  of  the  disposition  of  the  lines  of  magnetic 
force  pertaining  to  a  magnet,  or  of  the  physical  nature  of  this 
power  and  its  possible  mode  of  action  at  a  distance,  it  became 
quite  essential  to  know  what  change,  if  any,  took  place  in  the 
amount  of  force  possessed  by  a  perfect  magnet,  when  subjected 
to  other  magnets  in  favourable  or  adverse  positions  j  and  how 
the  forces  combined  together,  or  were  disposed  of,  i.  e.  generally, 
and  in  relation  to  the  principle  already  asserted  and  I  think 
proved,  that  the  power  is  in  every  case  definite  under  those 
different  conditions.  The  representation  of  the  magnetic  power 
by  lines  of  force  (30/4.),  and  the  employment  of  the  moving 
wire  as  a  test  of  the  force  (3076.),  will  I  think  assist  much  in 
this  investigation. 

3216.  For  such  a  purpose  an  ordinary  magnet  is  a  very  irre- 
gular and  imperfect  source  of  power.  It  not  only,  when  mag- 
netized to  a  given  degree,  is  apt  by  slight  circumstances  to  have 
its  magnetic  power 'diminished  or  exalted,  in  a  manner  which 


392  Lints  of  magnetic  force.     [Series  XXIX. 

may  be  considered  for  the  time,  permanent;  but  if  placed  in 
adverse  or  favourable  relations  to  other  magnets,  frequently 
admits  of  a  considerable  temporary  diminution  or  increase  of  its 
power  externally,  which  change  disappears  as  soon  as  it  is 
removed  from  the  neighbourhood  of  the  dominant  magnet. 
These  changes  produce  corresponding  effects  upon  the  movmg 
wire,  and  they  render  any  magnet  subject  to  them  unfit  for  in- 
vestigation in  relation  to  definite  power.    Unchangeable  mag- 
nets are,  therefore,  required,  and  these  are  best  obtained,  as  is 
well  known,  by  selecting  good  steel  for  the  bars,  and  then 
making  them  exceedingly  hard;  I  therefore  procured  some 
plates  of  thin  steel  twelve  inches  long  and  one  inch  broad,  and 
making  them  as  hard  as  I  could,  afterwards  magnetized  them 
very  carefully  and  regularly,  by  two  powerful  steel  bar-magnets, 
shook  them  together  in  different  and  adverse  positions  for  a 
little  while,  and  then  examined  the  direction  of  the  forces  by  iron 
fihngs.    Small  cracks  and  irregularities  were  in  this  way  detected 
in  several  of  them  ;  but  two  which  were  very  regular  in  the  dis- 
position of  their  forces  were  selected  for  further  experiment,  and 
may  be  distinguished  as  the  subjected  magnets  D  and  E. 

3217.  These  two  magnets  were  examined  by  the  moving  loop 
precisely  in  the  manner  before  described  (3133.),  i.  e.  by  passing 
the  loop  over  one  of  the  poles,  observing  the  swing,  removing  it, 
and  again  observing  the  swing  and  taking  an  average  of  many 
results ;  the  process  was  performed  over  both  poles  at  different 
times.    The  loop  contained  7"25  inches  in  length  of  copper  wire 
0-1  of  an  inch  in  diameter,  and  was  of  course  employed  in  all  the 
following  comparative  experiments ;  the  distance  of  the  loop  and 
magnets  from  the  galvanometer  was  9  feet.    For  one  passage 
over  the  pole  either  on  or  off,  i.  e.  for  one  intersection  of  the 
lines  of  force  of  the  magnet  D,  the  galvanometer  deflection  was 
8°'36.    For  one  intersection  of  the  lines  of  force  of  the  other 
bar  E.  the  deflection  was  8°-78.    The  two  bars  were  then  placed 
side  by  side  with  like  poles  together,  and  afterwards  used  as  one 
magnet;  their  conjoined  power  was  16°-3,  being  only  0°-84  less 
than  the  sum  of  the  powers  of  the  two  when  estimated  separately. 
This  indicates  that  the  component  magnets  do  affect,  and  in  this 
position  reduce,  each  other  somewhat;  but  it  also  shows  how 
small  the  effect  is  as  compared  with  ordinary  magnets  (3222.). 
3218.  The  compound  magnet  D  E  (3217,)  was  now  subjected 


Dec.  1851.]    Associated  magnets— vm-ious  jjositions.  393 

to  the  close  action  of  another  magnet,  sometimes  under  adverse, 
and  at  other  times  under  favourable  conditions ;  and  was  exa- 
mined by  the  loop  as  to  the  sum  of  its  power  (not  the  direction) 
under  these  circumstances.  For  this  purpose  it  was  fixed,  and 
another  magnet  A  brought  near,  and  at  times  in  contact  with  it, 
in  the  positions  indicated  by  the  figure  8 ;  the  loop  in  each  case 

Fig.  8. 


being  applied  many  times  to  D  E,  that  a  correct  average  of  its 
power  might  be  procured.  The  dominant  magnet  A  was  much 
the  stronger  of  the  two,  having  the  power  indicated  by  a  swing 
deflection  of  25°- 74. 

3219.  When  the  relative  position  of  the  magnets  was  as  at  1, 
then  the  poAver  of  D  E  was  16°'37 ;  when  as  at  2,  the  power 
was  16^*4  ;  when  as  at  3,  it  was  18^'75  ;  and  when  as  at  4,  it 
was  17°' 18.  All  these  positions  are  such  as  vrould  tend  to  raise, 
by  induction,  the  power  of  the  magnet  D  E,  and  they  do  raise 
it  above  its  first  value,  which  was  16°'3  ;  but  it  is  seen  at  once 
how  little  the  first  and  second  positions  elevate  it ;  and  even  the 
third,  which  presents  the  most  favourable  conditions,  only  in- 
creases the  power  2°"45,  which  falls  again  in  the  fourth  position. 

3220.  Then  the  dominant  magnet  A  was  placed  in  the  same 
positions,  but  with  the  ends  reversed,  so  as  to  exert  an  adverse 
or  depressing  influence ;  and  now  the  results  with  D  E  were  as 
follows  : — 

Position  1  15-37 

Position  2  15-68 

Position  3  15-37 

Position  4  16-06 

All  these  are  a  little  below  the  original  force  of  D  E,  or  16°-3, 
as  they  ought  to  be,  and  show  how  slightly  this  hard  bar-magnet 
is  affected. 


394 


Lines  of  magnetic  force.     [Series  XXIX. 


3221.  A  soft  iron  bar,  now  applied  in  the  first,  second  and 
third  positions  instead  of  the  magnet  A,  raised  D  E  to  the  fol- 
lowing values  respectively,  16°-24,  16°'43,  and  18°. 

3222.  When  an  ordinary  bar-magnet  was  employed  instead 
of  the  hard  magnet  D  E,  great  changes  took  place.  Thus  a 
bar  B,  corresponding  to  bar  A  in  size  and  general  character, 
was  employed  in  place  of  the  hard  magnet.  Alone,  B  had  a 
power  of  14°-83,  but  when  associated  adversely  with  A,  as  in 
position  3  (3218.),  its  power  fell  to  7°-^7,  being  reduced  nearly 
one-half.  This  loss  was  chiefly  due  to  a  coercion  internally,  and 
not  to  a  permanent  destruction  of  the  state  of  magnet  B ;  for 
when  A  was  removed,  B  rose  again  to  13°-06.  When  B  was 
laid  for  a  few  moments  favourably  on  A  and  then  removed,  it 
was  found  that  the  latter  had  been  raised  to  a  permanent  exter- 
nal action  of  15°' 25. 

3223.  A  very  hard  steel  bar  6  inches  long,  0'5  broad  and  O'l 
in  thickness,  given  to  me  by  Dr.  Scoresby,  was  magnetized  and 
then  found,  by  the  use  of  the  loop,  to  have  a  value  at  my  gal- 
vanometer of  6°'88  (3 189.).  It  was  submitted  in  position  2  to  a 
compound  bar-magnet  like  D  E,  having  a  power  of  ll°-73,  or 
almost  twice  its  own  force,  but  whether  in  the  adverse  or  the 
favourable  position,  its  power  was  not  sensibly  altered.  When 
submitted  in  like  manner  to  a  12-inch  bar-magnet  having  a  force 
of  40°-21,  it  was  raised  to  7°-53,  or  lowered  to  5°-87,  but  here 
the  dominant  magnet  had  nearly  six  times  the  power  of  the  one 

3224. '  The  variability  of  soft  steel  magnets,  both  in  respect 
of  their  absolute  degree  of  excitation  or  charge,  and  also  of  the 
disposition  of  the  force  externally  and  internally,  when  tneir 
degree  of  excitation  may  for  the  time  be  considered  as  the  same, 
is  made  very  manifest  by  this  mode  of  examination  ;  and  the  re- 
sults agree  well  with  our  former  knowledge  in  this  respect.  It 
is  equally  manifest,  that  hard  and  invariable  magnets  are  requi- 
site for  a  correct  and  close  investigation  of  the  disposition  and 
characters  of  the  magnetic  force.  A  common  soft  bar-magnet 
may  be  considered  as  an  assemblage  of  hard  and  soft  parts, 
disposed  in  a  manner  utterly  uncertain ;  of  which  some  parts 
take  a  much  higher  charge  than  others,  and  change  less  under 
the  influence  of  external  magnets;  whilst,  because  of  the  pre- 
sence of  other  parts  within,  acting  as  the  keeper  or  submagnet. 


Dec.  1851.]  Associated  magnets.  395 

they  may  seem  to  undergo  far  greater  changes  than  they  really 
do.  Hence  the  value  of  these  hard  and  comparatively  un- 
changeable magnets  which  Scoresby  describes. 

3225.  From  these  and  such  results,  it  appears  to  me,  that 
with  perfect,  unchangeable  magnets,  and  using  the  term  line  of 
force  as  a  mere  representant  of  the  force  as  before  defined  (3071. 
3072.),  the  following  useful  conclusions  may  be  drawn. 

3226.  Lines  offeree  of  different  magnets  in  favourable  posi- 
tions to  each  other  coalesce. 

3227.  There  is  no  increase  of  the  total  force  of  the  lines  by 
this  coalescence ;  the  section  between  the  two  associated  poles 
gives  the  same  sum  of  power  as  that  of  the  section  of  the  Hues 
of  the  invariable  magnet  when  it  is  alone  (3217.)-  Under  these 
circumstances  there  is,  I  think,  no  doubt  that  the  external  and 
internal  forces  of  the  same  magnet  have  the  same  relation  and 
are  equivalent  to  each  othei',  as  was  determined  in  a  former  part 
of  these  Researches  (3 11 7.);  and  that  therefore  the  equatorial 
section,  which  represents  the  sum  of  forces  or  lines  of  forces 
passing  through  the  magnet,  remains  also  unchanged  (3232.). 

3228.  In  this  case  the  analogy  with  two  or  more  voltaic  bat- 
teries associated  end  to  end  in  one  circuit  is  perfect.  Probably 
some  effect,  correspondent  to  intensity  in  the  case  of  the  batteries, 
will  be  found  to  exist  amongst  the  magnets. 

3229.  The  increase  of  power  upon  a  magnetic  needle,  or  piece 
of  soft  iron  placed  between  two  opposite,  favourable  poles,  is 
caused  by  concentration  upon  it  of  the  lines  which  before  were 
diffused,  and  not  by  the  addition  of  the  power  represented  by  the 
lines  of  force  of  one  pole  to  that  of  the  lines  of  force  of  the  other. 
Tiiere  is  no  more  power  represented  by  all  the  lines  of  force 
than  before ;  and  a  line  of  force  is  not  more  powerful  because 
it  coalesces  with  a  line  of  force  of  another  magnet.  In  this  re- 
spect the  analogy  with  the  voltaic  pile  is  also  perfect. 

3230.  A  line  of  magnetic  force  being  considered  as  a  closed 
circuit  (3117.)3  passes  in  its  course  through  both  the  magnets, 
which  are  for  the  time  placed  so  as  to  act  on  each  other  favour- 
ably, i.  e.  whose  hncs  coincide  and  coalesce.  Coalescence  is  not 
the  addition  of  one  line  of  force  to  another  in  power,  but  their 
union  in  one  common  circuit. 

3231.  A  line  of  force  may  pass  through  many  magnets  before 
its  circuit  is  complete ;  and  these  many  magnets  coincide  as  a 


396  Lines  of  magnetic  force.     [Series  XXIX. 

case  with  that  of  a  single  magnet.    If  a  thin  bar-magnet  12 
inches  long  be  examined  by  filings  (3235.),  it  will  be  found  to 
present  the  well-known  beautiful  system  of  forces,  perfectly  simple 
in  its  arrangement.    If  it  be  broken  in  half,  without  being  se- 
parated, and  again  examined,  the  manner  in  which,  from  the 
destruction  of  the  continuity,  the  transmission  of  the  force  at 
the  equator  is  interfered  with,  and  many  of  the  Unes,  which 
before  were  within  are  made  to  appear  externally  there,  is  at 
once  evident,  Plate  III.  fig.  6.  Of  those  lines,  which  thus  become 
external,  some  return  back  to  the  pole  which  is  nearest  to  the 
new  place,  at  which  the  Hues  issue  into  the  air,  making  their 
circuit  through  only  one  of  the  halves  of  the  magnet ;  whilst 
others  proceed  onward  by  paths  more  or  less  curved  into  the 
second  half  of  the  magnet,  keeping  generally  the  direction  or 
polarity  which  they  had  whilst  within  the  magnet,  and  complete 
their  circuit  through  the  two.    Gradually  separating  the  two 
halves,  and  continuing  to  examine  the  course  of  the  Hues  of 
force,  it  is  beautiful  to  observe  how  more  and  more  of  the  lines 
which  issue  from  the  two  new  terminations,  turn  back  to  the 
original  extremities  of  the  bar,  fig.  7,  and  how  the  portion  which 
makes  a  common  circuit  through  the  two  halves  diminishes, 
until  the  halves  are  entirely  removed  from  each  other's  influence, 
and  then  become  two  separate  and  independent  magnets.  The 
same  process  may  be  repeated  until  there  are  many  magnets  in 
place  of  one. 

3232.  All  this  time  the  amount  of  hues  of  force  is  the  same  if 
the  fragments  of  the  bar  preserve  their  full  state  of  magnetism  ; 
i.  e.  the  sum  of  lines  of  force  in  the  equator  of  either  of  the 
new  magnets  is  equal  to  the  sum  of  Unes  of  force  in  the  equator 
of  the  original  unbroken  bar.    I  took  a  steel  bar  12  inches  long, 
1  inch  broad  and  0*05  of  an  inch  thick,  made  it  very  hard,  and 
magnetized  it  to  saturation  by  the  use  of  soft  iron  cores  and  a 
helix ;  its  power  was  6°-9.    I  broke  it  into  two  pieces  nearly  in 
.  the  middle,  and  found  the  power  of  these  respectively  5  -94  and 
5°-89 ;  indicating  a  fall  not  more  than  was  to  be  expected  con- 
sidering the  saturated  state  of  the  original  magnet.    When  these 
halves  were  placed  side  by  side,  with  like  poles  together  as  a 
compound  magnet,  they  had  a  joint  power  of  ll°-06,  which, 
though  it  shows  a  mutual  quelling  influence,  is  not  much  below 
the  sum  of  their  powers  ascertained  separately.    All  this  is  in 


Dec.  1851.]      Their  delineation  by  iron  filings.  397 

perfect  harmony  with  the  voltaic  battery,  where  lines  of  dynamic 
electric  force  are  concerned.  If,  as  is  well  known,  we  separate 
a  battery  of  20  pair  of  plates  into  two  batteries  of  10  pair,  or 
4  batteries  of  5  pair,  each  of  the  smaller  batteries  can  supply 
as  much  dynamic  electricity  as  the  original  battery,  provided  no 
sensible  obstruction  be  thrown  into  the  course  of  the  lines,  i.  e. 
the  path  of  the  current. 

3233.  When  magnets  are  placed  in  an  adverse  position,  as 
neither  could  add  power  to  the  other  in  the  former  case,  so  now 
each  retains  its  own  power ;  and  the  lines  of  magnetic  force  re- 
present this  condition  accurately.  Two  magnets  placed  end 
to  end  with  like  poles  together  are  in  this  relation ;  so  also  are 
they  if  placed  with  like  poles  together  side  by  side.  In  the 
latter  case  the  two  acting  as  one  compound  magnet,  give  a  sy- 
stem of  lines  of  force  equal  to  the  sum  of  the  two  separately 
(3232.),  minus  the  portion  which,  as  in  imperfect  magnets,  is 
either  directed  inwards  by  the  softer  parts  or  ceases  to  be  excited 
altogether. 

§  37.  Delineation  of  Lines  of  Magnetic  Force  by  iron  filings. 

3234.  It  would  be  a  voluntary  and  unnecessary  abandonment 
of  most  valuable  aid,  if  an  experimentalist,  who  chooses  to  con- 
sider magnetic  power  as  represented  by  lines  of  magnetic  force, 
were  to  deny  himself  the  use  of  iron  filings.  By  their  employ- 
ment he  may  make  many  conditions  of  the  power,  even  in  com- 
plicated cases,  visible  to  the  eye  at  once  ;  may  trace  the  varying 
direction  of  the  lines  of  force  and  determine  the  relative  polarity; 
may  observe  in  which  direction  the  power  is  increasing  or  dimi- 
nishing; and  in  complex  systems  may  determine  the  neuti'al 
points  or  places  where  there  is  neither  polarity  nor  power,  even 
Avhen  they  occur  in  the  midst  of  powerful  magnets.  By  their 
use  probable  results  may  be  seen  at  once,  and  many  a  valuable 
suggestion  gained  for  future  leading  experiments. 

3235.  Nothing  is  simpler  than  to  lay  a  magnet  upon  a  table, 
place  a  flat  piece  of  paper  over  it,  and  then  sprinkling  iron 
filings  on  the  paper,  to  observe  the  forms  they  assume.  Never- 
theless, to  obtain  the  best  and  most  generally  useful  results,  a 
few  particular  instructions  may  be  desirable.  The  table  on 
which  the  magnet'ia  laid  should  be  quite  horizontal  and  steady. 


398  Liries  of  magnetic  force.     [Series  XXIX. 

Means  should  be  taken,  by  the  use  of  thin  boards  or  laths,  or 
otherwise,  to  block  up  round  the  magnet,  so  that  the  paper 
which  is  laid  over  it  should  be  level.    The  paper  should  be 
without  any  cockle  or  bend,  and  perfectly  flat,  that  the  fihngs  may 
be  free  to  assume  the  position  which  the  magnet  tends  to  give 
them.    I  have  found  well-made  cartridge  or  thin  drawing-paper 
good  for  the  purpose.    It  should  not  be  too  smooth  in  ordinary 
cases,  or  the  fihngs,  when  slightly  agitated,  move  too  freely  to- 
wards the  magnet.    With  very  weak  or  distant  magnets  I  have 
found  silvered  paper  sometimes  useful.    The  filings  should  be 
clean,  i.  e.  free  from  much  dirt  or  oxide  ;  the  latter  forms  the  lines 
but  does  not  give  good  dehneations.  The  fiUngs  should  be  distri- 
buted over  the  paper  by  means  of  a  sieve  more  or  less  fine,  their 
quantity  being  partly  a  matter  of  taste.    It  is  to  be  remembered, 
however,  that  the  filings  disturb  in  some  degree  the  conditions 
of  the  magnetic  power  where  they  are  present,  and  that  in  the 
case  of  small  magnets,  as  needles,  a  large  proportion  of  them 
should  be  avoided.   Large  and  also  fine  filings  are  equally  useful 
in  turn,  when  the  object  is  to  preserve  the  forms  obtained.  For 
the  distribution  of  the  latter  it  is  better  to  use  a  fine  sieve  with 
the  ordinary  filings  than  to  separate  the  filings  first  :  a  better 
distribution  on  the  paper  is  obtained.    The  filings  being  sifted 
evenly  on  the  paper,  the  latter  should  be  tapped  very  lightly  by 
a  small  piece  of  wood,  as  a  pen-holder;  the  taps  being  applied 
wherever  the  particles  are  not  sufficiently  arranged.    The  taps 
must  be  perpendicularly  downwards,  not  obhquely,  so  that  the 
particles,  whilst  they  have  the  liberty  of  motion,  for  an  instant 
are  not  driven  out  of  their  places,  and  the  paper  should  be  held 
down  firmly  at  one  corner,  so  as  not  to  shift  right  or  left ;  the 
lines  are  instantly  formed,  especially  with  fine  filings. 

3236  The  designs  thus  obtained  may  be  fixed  in  the  following 
manner,  and  then  form  very  valuable  records  of  the  disposition 
of  the  forces  in  any  given  case.  By  turning  up  two  corners  of 
the  paper  on  which  the  fihngs  rest,  they  may  be  used  as  handles 
to  raise  the  paper  upwards  from  the  magnet,  to  be  deposited  on 
a  flat  board  or  other  plane  surface.  A  solution  of  one  part  of 
e-um  in  three  or  four  of  water  having  been  prepared,  a  coat  of 
this  is  to  be  applied  equably  by  a  broad  camel-hair  pencd,  to  a 
piece  of  cartridge  paper,  so  as  to  make  it  fairly  wet,  but  not  to 
float  it,  and  after  wafting  it  through  the  air  once  or  twice  to  break 


Dec.  1851.]      Their  delineation  by  iron  filings. 


399 


the  bubbles,  it  is  to  be  laid  carefully  over  the  filings,  then  covered 
with  ten  or  twelve  folds  of  equable  soft  paper,  a  board  placed 
over  the  paper,  and  a  half-hundred  weight  on  the  board  for 
thirty  or  forty  seconds.  Or  else,  and  for  large  designs  it  is  a 
better  process,  whilst  the  papers  are  held  so  that  they  shall  not 
shift  on  each  other,  the  hand  should  be  applied  so  as  to  rub 
with  moderate  pressure  over  all  the  surface  equably  and  in  one 
direction.  If,  after  that,  the  paper  be  taken  up,  all  the  filings 
will  be  found  to  adhere  to  it  with  very  little  injury  to  the  forms 
of  the  lines  delineated  ;  and  when  dry  they  are  firmly  fixed.  If 
a  little  solution  of  the  red  ferroprussiate  of  potassa  and  a  small 
proportion  of  tartaric  acid  be  added  to  the  gum-water,  a  yellow 
tint  is  given  to  the  paper,  which  is  not  unpleasant ;  but  besides 
that,  prussian  blue  is  formed  under  every  particle  of  iron ;  and 
then  when  the  fihngs  are  purposely  or  otherwise  displaced,  the 
design  still  remains  recorded.  When  the  designs  are  to  be  pre- 
served in  blue  only,  the  gum  may  be  dispensed  with  and  the 
red  ferroprussiate  solution  only  be  used. 

3237.  It  must  be  well  understood  that  these  forms  give  no 
indication  by  their  appearance  of  the  relative  strength  of  the 
magnetic  force  at  different  places,  inasmuch  as  the  appearance 
of  the  lines  depends  greatly  upon  the  quantity  of  filings  and  the 
amount  of  tapping ;  but  the  direction  and  forms  of  the  lines  are 
well  given,  and  these  indicate,  in  a  considerable  degree,  the  di- 
rection in  which  the  forces  increase  and  diminish. 

3238.  Plate  III.  fig.  1,  shows  the  forms  assumed  about  a  bar- 
magnet.  On  using  a  little  electro-magnet  and  varying  the  strength 
of  the  current  passed  through  it,  I  could  not  find  that  a  variation 
in  the  strength  of  the  magnet  produced  any  alteration  in  the 
forms  of  the  lines  of  force  external  to  it.  Fig.  2  shows  the  lines 
over  a  pole,  and  fig.  3  those  between  contrary  poles.  The  latter 
accord  with  the  magnetic  curves,  as  determined  and  described  by 
Dr.  Roget  and  others,  with  the  assumption  of  the  poles  as  centres 
of  force.  The  difference  between  them  and  those  belonging  to 
a  continuous  magnet,  shown  in  fig.  1,  is  evident.  Figs.  4,  5  show 
the  lines  produced  by  short  magnets.  In  the  latter  case  the 
magnet  was  a  steel  disc  about  one  inch  in  diameter  and  0-05 
in  thickness.  Fig.  6  shoM^s  the  result  when  a  bar-magnet  is 
broken  in  half,  but  not  separated.    Fig.  7  shows  the  development 


400  Lines  of  magnetic  force.     [Skries  XXIX. 

of  the  lines  externally  at  the  two  new  ends  as  the  halves  are  more 
and  more  separated  (3231.).  Figs.  8,  9  and  10  present  the  re- 
sults, with  the  two  halves  or  new  magnets  in  different  positions. 
Figs.  11,  12,  13  and  14  show  the  results  with  disc  magnets. 
Fig.  15  shows  the  condition  of  a  system  of  magnetic  forces  when 
it  is  inclosed  by  a  larger  one,  and  is  contrary  to  it.  Fig.  16 
shows  the  coalescence  of  the  lines  of  force  (3226.)  when  the 
magnets  are  so  placed  that  the  polarities  are  in  accordance. 

3239.  Fig.  17  exhibits  the  lines  of  force  round  a  vertical  wire 
carrying  a  current  of  electricity.  Whether  the  wire  was  thick 
or  thin  appeared  to  make  no  difference  as  to  the  intensity  of  the 
forces,  the  current  remaining  the  same.  Fig.  18  represents  the 
lines  round  two  like  currents  when  within  mutual  influence. 
Fig.  19  shows  the  result  when  a  third  current  is  introduced  in 
the  contrary  direction.  Fig.  20  presents  the  transition  to  a  hehx 
of  three  convolutions.  Fig.  21  indicates  the  direction  of  the 
lines  within  and  outside  the  end  of  a  cylindrical  helix,  on  a  plane 
through  its  axis.  Fig.  22  presents  the  effect  when  a  very  small 
soft  iron  core  is  within  the  helix. 

3240.  Figs.  23  and  24  give  an  experimental  illustration  of  the 
principles  which  I  have  adopted  in  relation  to  atmospheric  mag- 
netism  and  the  general  cause  of  the  daily  variations  &c.  (2864. 
2917  )   Ahemisphere  of  pure  nickelpresented  to  me  by  Dr.  Percy, 
was  supported  with  its  flat  face  uppermost,  and  a  large  ring  ar- 
ranged round  it  to  carry  paper,  which,  resting  both  on  the  ring 
and  the  nickel,  could  then  have  iron  filings  sprinkled  and  arranged 
in  form  on  it.    The  end  of  a  bar-magnet  in  the  same  horizontal 
plane  was  adjusted  about  2  inches  from  the  nickel,  and  thus  the 
forms  of  the  Unes  of  force  associated  with  this  pole  could  be  de- 
termined over  the  place  of  the  nickel  hemisphere,  under  diflferen 
circumstances,  or  Len  when  it  was  removed.   When  the  nickel 
was  away,  the  forms  of  the  lines  of  force  were  as  in  fig  23  ; 
when  the  nickel  was  there,  they  were  as  in  fig.  24.    Ihe  appli 
Tat  on  of  a  spirit-lamp  to  the  nickel  when  in  its  place,  raised  i  s 
emperature'to  such  k  degree  (above  600°  Fahr.)  that  it  los  its 
orZary  magnetic  condition;  and  then  the  forms  of  the  lu  es  of 
force  as  shown  by  fiUngs,  were  the  same  as  if  the  nickel  was 
Iway     Removing  the  lamp,  I  was  able  to  obtain  the  disposi  ion 
of  fiUngs  on  successive  pieces  of  paper,  and  as  many  as  four 


Drc.  1851.]      Effect  of  temperaiure  on  nickel. 


401 


results,  like  fig.  23,  could  be  procured  before  the  temperature 
had  sunk  so  much  as  to  cause  the  production  of  lines  of  force 
corresponding  to  tig.  24. 

3241.  These  are  exactly  the  same  results  with  nickel  as  those 
I  have  assumed  for  the  oxygen  of  the  atmosphere.  The  change 
in  the  forms  of  the  lines  about  the  cooling  nickel  in  this  experi- 
ment are  the  same  changes  as  those  1  have  figured  in  the  type 
globe  of  cooling  air  (2865.  2874.).  Both  nickel  and  oxygen  are 
paramagnetic  bodies,  and  change  in  the  same  direction  by  heating 
and  cooling ;  and  as  the  period  of  change  with  oxygen  extends 
through  degrees  above  and  below  common  temperature  (2861.), 
so  inflections  of  the  lines  of  force  passing  through  the  atmo- 
sphere, correspondent  to  those  of  the  heating  and  cooling  nickel, 
must  take  place  to  some  extent.  It  is  seen  in  the  nickel  results, 
that  lines  of  force  entirely  outside  of  it  do  not  for  that  reason 
continue  an  undeviating  course,  but  are  curved  to  and  fro  in 
consequence  of  the  disposition  of  other  lines  within  the  nickel ;  a 
result,  which,  without  reference  to  either  one  view  or  another  of 
the  phj'sical  action  of  the  magnetic  force,  must  be  as  true  in  the 
oxygen  case  as  in  the  nickel  case,  because  of  the  definite  character 
of  the  magnetic  force,  whether  represented  by  centres  of  action 
or  by  lines  of  power. 

3242.  Whether  the  amount  of  the  deflection  in  the  case  of  the 
atmosphere  corresponds  with  the  facts  registered  by  observers, 
is  a  question  which  cannot  be  answered,  I  suppose,  until  we 
know  the  eflfect  of  very  low  temperatures  upon  the  magnetic  force 
of  the  atmosphere.  In  the  nickel  experiment  the  deflection  is 
in  places  30°  or  40° ;  in  nature  the  effect  to  be  accounted  for  is 
not  more  than  13  or  14  minutes. 

Royal  Institution, 
December  20,  1851. 


VOI^.  111. 


402 


On  the  Lines  of  Magnetic  Forced 

That  beautiful  system  of  power  which  is  made  manifest  in 
the  magnet,  and  which  appears  to  be  chiefly  developed  in  the 
two  extremities,  thence  called  ordinarily  the  magnetic  poles,  is 
usually  rendered  evident  to  us  in  the  case  of  a  particular  magnet 
by  the  attractive  or  repulsive  effect  of  these  parts  on  the  corre- 
sponding parts  of  another  magnet;  and  these  actions  have  been 
employed,  both  to  indicate  the  direction  in  which  the  magnetic 
force  is  exerted  and  also  the  amount  of  the  force  at  different 
distances.    Thus,  if  the  attraction  be  referred  to,  it  may  be  ob- 
served either  upon  another  magnet  or  upon  a  piece  of  soft  iron  ; 
and  the  law  which  results,  for  effects  beyond  a  certain  distance, 
is,  that  the  force  is  inversely  as  the  square  of  the  distance. 
When  the  distances  of  the  acting  bodies  from  each  other  is 
small,  then  this  law  does  not  hold,  either  for  the  surface  of  the 
magnets  or  for  any  given  point  within  them. 

It  is  proposed  to  employ  a  new  method,  founded  upon 
a  property  of  the  magnetic  forces  different  from  that  pro- 
ducing attraction  or  repulsion,  for  the  purpose  of  ascertaining 
the  direction,  intensity,  and  amount  of  these  forces,— not  to  the 
displacement  of  the  former  method,  but  to  be  used  m  con- 
iunction  with  it ;  and  which  may  be  highly  influential  m  the 
further  development  of  the  nature  of  this  power,  masmuch  as 
the  principle  of  action,  though  different,  is  not  less  magnetic 
than  attraction  and  repulsion,  not  less  strict,  and  the  results  not 

less  definite.  . 

The  term  line  of  magnetic  force  is  intended  to  express  simply 
the  direction  of  the  force  in  any  given  place,  and  not  any  phy- 
sical idea  or  notion  of  the  manner  in  which  the  force  may  be 
there  exerted ;  as  by  actions  at  a  distance,  or  pulsations,  or 
waves,  or  a  current,  or  what  not.  A  line  of  magnetic  force  may 
be  defined  to  be  that  line  which  is  described  by  a  very  small 
magnetic  needle,  when  it  is  so  moved  in  either  direction  corre- 
spondent to  its  length,  that  the  needle  is  constantly  a  tangent  to 
the  line  of  motion ;  or,  it  is  that  line  along  which,  if  a  trans- 
verse wire  be  moved  in  either  direction,  there  is  no  tendency 
1  Royal  Institution  Proceedings,  23rd  January,  1852. 


Jan.  1852.]  Lines  of  magnetic  force.  403 

to  the  formation  of  an  electric  current  in  the  wire,  whilst  if 
moved  in  any  other  direction  there  is  such  a  tendency.  The 
direction  of  these  Unes  about  and  between  ordinary  magnets  is 
easily  represented  in  a  general  manner  by  the  well-known  use  of 
iron  filings. 

The  proposed  method  of  recognizing  and  taking  account  of 
these  lines  of  force,  is  to  collect  and  measure  the  electricity  set 
into  motion  in  the  moving  transverse  wire ;  a  process  entirely 
different  in  its  nature  and  action  to  that  founded  on  the  use  of 
a  magnetic  needle.  That  it  may  be  advantageously  employed, 
excellent  conductors  are  required;  and  therefore  those  pro- 
ceeding from  the  moving  wire  to  the  galvanometer  were  of 
copper  0"2  of  an  inch  in  thickness,  and  as  short  as  was  con- 
venient. The  galvanometer,  also,  instead  of  including  many 
hundred  convolutions  of  along  fine  wire,  consisted  only  of  about 
48  or  50  inches  of  such  wire  as  that  described  above,  disposed 
in  two  double  coils  about  the  astatic  needle :  and  that  used  in 
the  careful  research  contained  only  20  inches  in  length  of  a 
copper  bar  0'2  of  an  inch  square.  These  galvanometers  showed 
effects  30,  40  or  50  times  greater  than  those  constructed  with 
fine  wire ;  so  abundant  is  the  quantity  of  electricity  produced 
by  the  intersections  of  the  lines  of  magnetic  force,  though  veiy 
low  in  intensity. 

The  lines  of  force  aheady  described  will,  if  observed  by  iron 
filings  or  a  magnetic  needle  or  otherwise,  be  found  to  start  off 
from  one  end  of  a  bar-magnet,  and  after  describing  curves  of 
different  magnitudes  through  the  sun'ounding  space,  to  return  to 
and  set  on  at  the  other  end  of  the  magnet ;  and  these  forces 
being  regular,  it  is  evident  that  if  a  ring,  a  little  lai'ger  than  the 
magnet,  be  carried  from  a  distance  towards  the  magnet  and  over 
one  end  until  it  has  arrived  at  the  equatorial  part,  it  will  have 
intersected  once  all  the  external  lines  of  force  of  that  magnet. 
Such  rings  were  soldered  on  to  fitly  shaped  conductors  connected 
with  the  galvanometer,  and  the  deflections  of  the  needle  observed 
for  one,  two,  or  more  such  motions  or  intersections  of  the  lines 
of  force  :  it  has  been  found  that  when  every  precaution  was  taken, 
and  the  results  at  the  galvanometer  carefully  observed,  the  effect 
there  was  sensibly  proportionate  for  small  or  moderate  arcs  to 
the  number  of  times  the  loop  or  ring  had  passed  over  the  pole. 
In  this  way,  not  only  could  the  definite  actions  of  the  inter- 

2  D  2 


404  Lines  of  magnetic  force.  [Jan.  1852. 

secting  wire  be  observed  and  established,  but  also  one  magnet 
could  be  compared  to  another:  wires  of  different  thickness  and 
of  different  substances  could  be  compared  ;  and  the  sections  also 
described  by  the  wire  in  its  journej  could  be  varied.  When  the 
wire  was  the  same  in  length,  diameter,  and  substance,  no  matter 
what  its  course  was  across  the  lines  of  force,  whether  direct  or 
obhque,  near  to  or  far  from  the  poles  of  the  magnet,  the  result 
was  the  same. 

A  compound  bar-magnet  was  so  fitted  up  that  it  could  revolve 
on  its  axis,  and  a  broad  circular  copper  ring  was  fixed  on  it  at 
the  middle  distance  or  equator,  so  as  to  give  a  cylindrical  exterior 
at  that  place.    A  copper  wire  being  made  fast  to  this  ring 
within,  then  proceeded  to  the  middle  of  the  magnet,  and  after- 
wards along  its  axis  and  out  at  one  end.    A  second  wire 
touched,  by  a  spring  contact,  the  outside  of  the  copper  rmg,  and 
was  then  continued  outwards  six  inches,  after  which  it  rose  and 
finally  turned  over  the  upper  pole  towards  the  first  wire,  and 
was  attached  to  a  cylinder  insulated  from  but  moving  round  it 
This  cylinder  and  the  wire  passing  through  it  were  connected 
with  the  galvanometer  so  that  the  circuit  was  complete  ;  but  that  . 
circuit  had  its  course  down  the  middle  of  the  magnet,  then  out- 
wards at  the  equator,  and  back  again  on  the  outside,  and  whilst 
always  perfect,  allowed  the  magnet  to  be  rotated  ^-ithout  the  ex- 
ternal part  of  the  circuit,  or  the  latter  without  the  magnet,  or 
both  together.    When  the  magnet  and  external  wire  were  re- 
volved together,  as  one  arrangement  fixed  in  its  parts,  there  was 
no  effect  at  the  galvanometer,  however  long  the  rotation  was 
continued.    When  the  magnet  with  the  internal  wire  made  four 
revolutions,  as  the  hand  of  a  watch,  the  outer  conductor  bemg 
still  the  galvanometer  needle  was  deflected  35°  or  40  in  one 
direction?  when  the  magnet  was  still,  and  the  outer  wire  made 
four  revolutions  as  the  hands  of  a  watch,  the  galvanometer 
needle  was  deflected  as  much  as  before  in  the  contrary  Mon: 
and  n  the  more  careful  experiments  the  amount  of  deflection  for 
four  revolutions  was  precisely  the  same,  whatever  the  course  ot 
the  external  wire,  either  close  to  or  far  off  from  the  pole  of  he 
IVnet     Thus  it  was  shown,  that  when  the  magne    and  the 
^irf  itolved  in  the  same  direction,  contrary  currents  of  dec- 
c  4  ex  ctly  equal  to  each  other,  tended  to  be  produced ;  that 
tho  ?outside  resulted  from  the  intersection  by  the  outer  wire  of 


Jan.  1852.]  Lines  of  maynetic  force.  405 

the  lines  of  magnetic  force  external  to  the  magnet ;  that  M'herever 
this  intersection  was  made  the  result  was  the  same ;  and  that 
there  were  corresponding  lines  of  force  within  the  magnet, 
exactly  equal  in  force  or  amount  to  those  without,  but  in  the 
contrary  direction.  That  in  fact  every  line  of  magnetic  force  is  a 
closed  curve,  which  in  some  part  of  its  course  passes  through  the 
magnet  to  which  it  belongs.  The  vicinity  of  other  magnets  to 
this  magnet  made  no  difference  in  the  effect,  provided  they  were 
not  moved  during  the  experiments ;  and  in  this  manner  the  non- 
interference of  such  magnets  with  that  under  investigation  was 
fully  established. 

In  the  foregoing  cases  the  lines  of  force,  belonging  as  they  did 
to  small  systems,  rapidly  varied  in  intensity  according  to  their  di- 
stance from  the  magnet,  by  what  may  be  called  their  divergence. 
The  earth,  on  the  contrary,  presents  us,  within  the  hmits  of  one 
experiment  at  any  one  time,  a  field  of  equal  force.  The  dipping 
needle  indicates  the  direction  or  polarity  of  this  foi'ce  ;  and  if  we 
work  in  a  plane  perpendicular  to  the  dip,  then  the  number  or 
amount  of  the  lines  of  force  experimented  with  will  be  in  pro- 
portion to  the  area  which  our  apparatus  may  include.  Wires 
were  therefore  formed  into  parallelograms,  inclosing  areas  of 
various  extent,  as  one  square  foot,  or  nine  square  feet,  or  any 
other  proportion,  and  being  fixed  upon  axes  equidistant  from 
two  of  the  sides  could  have  these  axes  adjusted  perpendicular  to 
the  line  of  dip  and  could  then  be  revolved.  A  commutator  was 
employed,  and  associated  both  with  the  galvanometer  and  the 
parallelograms,  so  that  the  upper  part  of  the  revolving  wire 
always  sent  the  current  induced  in  it  in  the  same  direction. 
Here  it  was  found  that  rotation  in  one  direction  gave  one  electric 
current ;  that  rotation  in  the  reverse  direction  gave  the  contrary 
current ;  that  the  effect  at  the  galvanometer  was  proportionate  to 
the  number  of  rotations  with  the  same  rectangle ;  that  with 
different  sized  rectangles  of  the  same  wire  the  effect  was  propor- 
tionate to  the  area  of  the  rectangle,  i.  e.  the  number  of  curves 
intersected,  &c. 

All  these  and  other  results  are  more  fully  stated  and  proved  in 
papers  sent  to  the  Royal  Society  ^  The  general  conclusions 
are,  that  the  magnetic  lines  of  force  may  be  easily  recognized  and 
taken  account  of  by  the  moving  wire,  both  as  to  direction  and 

^  See  page  328,  &c. 


406  Lines  of  magnetic  force.  [Jan.  1852. 

intensity,  within  metals,  iron  or  magnets,  as  well  as  in  the  space 
around  ;  and  that  the  wire  sums  up  the  action  of  many  hnes  m 
one  result  :-that  the  lines  of  forces  well  represent  the  nature, 
condition,  direction,  and  amount  of  the  magnetic  forces  :-that 
the  effect  is  directly  as  the  number  of  lines  of  force  intersected 
whether  the  intersection  be  direct  or  obhque  :-that  in  a  field  ot 
equal  force,  it  is  directly  as  the  velocity ;  or  as  the  length  of  the 
moving  wire ;  or  as  the  mass  of  the  wire  :-that  the  external 
power  of  an  unchangeable  magnet  is  definAte  yet  ilUmitable  m 
extent;  and  that  any  section  of  all  the  lines  of  force  is  equal  to 
any  other  section  :-that  the  lines  of  force  within  the  magnet  are 
equal  to  those  without;  and  also  that  they  are  continuous  with 
those  without,  the  lines  of  force  being  closed  curves. 


407 


On  the  Physical  Character  of  the  lAnes  of  Magnetic  Force 

Note.  The  following  paper  contains  so  much  of  a  speculative 

and  hypothetical  nature,  that  I  have  thought  it  more  fitted  for 
the  pages  of  the  Philosophical  Magazine  than  those  of  the  Phi- 
losophical Transactions.  Still  it  is  so  connected  with,  and  de- 
pendent upon  former  researches,  that  I  have  continued  the 
system  and  series  of  paragraph  numbers  from  them  to  it.  I 
beg,  therefore,  to  inform  the  reader,  that  those  in  the  body  of 
the  text  refer  chiefly  to  papers  already  published,  or  ordered  for 
publication,  in  the  Philosophical  Transactions ;  and  that  they 
are  not  quite  essential  to  him  in  the  reading  of  the  present  paper, 
unless  he  is  led  to  a  serious  consideration  of  its  contents.  The 
paper,  as  is  evident,  follows  Series  xxviii.  and  xxix.,  now  printing 
in  the  Philosophical  Transactions,  and  depends  much  for  its  ex- 
perimental support  upon  the  more  strict  results  and  conclusions 
contained  in  them. 


.3243.  I  have  recently  been  engaged  in  describing  and  defining 
the  lines  of  magnetic  force  (3070.),  i.  e.  those  lines  which  are 
indicated  in  a  general  manner  by  the  disposition  of  iron  filings 
or  small  magnetic  needles,  around  or  between  magnets ;  and  I 
have  shown,  I  hope  satisfactorily,  how  these  lines  may  be  taken 
as  exact  representants  of  the  magnetic  power,  jboth  as  to  disposi- 
tion and  amount ;  also  how  they  may  be  recognized  by  a  moving- 
wire  in  a  manner  altogether  different  in  principle  from  the  in- 
dications given  by  a  magnetic  needle,  and  in  numerous  cases 
with  great  and  peculiar  advantages.  The  definition  then  given 
had  no  reference  to  the  physical  nature  of  the  force  at  the  place 
of  action,  and  will  apply  with  equal  accuracy  whatever  that  may 
be  ;  and  this  being  very  thoroughly  understood,  I  am  now  about 
to  leave  the  strict  line  of  reasoning  for  a  time,  and  enter  iipon  a 
few  speculations  respecting  the  physical  character  of  the  lines  of 
force,  and  the  manner  in  which  they  may  be  supposed  to  be  con- 
tinued through  space.  We  are  obliged  to  enter  into  such 
speculations  with  regard  to  numerous  natural  powei's,  and,  in- 

'  Philosophical  Magazine  for  June  1852. 


408  Physical  lines  of  force : —         [June  1852. 

deed,  that  of  gravity  is  the  only  instance  where  they  are  appa- 
rently shut  out. 

3244.  It  is  not  to  be  supposed  for  a  moment  that  speculations 
of  this  kind  are  useless,  or  necessarily  hurtful,  in  natural  philo- 
sophy.   They  should  ever  be  held  as  doubtful,  and  liable  to 
error  and  to  change ;  but  they  are  wonderful  aids  in  the  hands 
of  the  experimentalist  and  mathematician.  For  not  only  are  they 
useful  in  rendering  the  vague  idea  more  clear  for  the  time,  giving 
it  something  like  a  definite  sliape,  that  it  may  be  submitted  to 
experiment  and  calculation  ;  but  they  lead  on,  by  deduction  and 
correction,  to  the  discovery  of  new  phaenomena,  and  so  cause  an 
increase  and  advance  of  real  physical  truth,  which,  unhke  the 
hypothesis  that  led  to  it,  becomes  fundamental  knowledge  not 
subject  to  change.    Who  is  not  aware  of  the  remarkable  pro- 
gress in  the  development  of  the  nature  of  light  and  radiation  in 
modern  times,  and  the  extent  to  which  that  progress  has  been 
aided  by  the  hvpotheses  both  of  emission  and  undulation  ?  Such 
considerations"  form  my  excuse  for  entering  now  and  then  upon 
speculations ;  but  though  I  value  them  highly  when  cautiously 
advanced,  I  consider  it  as  an  essential  character  of  a  sound  mmd 
to  hold  them  in  doubt;  scarcely  giving  them  the  character  of 
opinions,  but  esteeming  them  merely  as  probabilities  and  possi- 
bilities, and  making  a  very  broad  distinction  between  them  and 
the  facts  and  laws  of  nature. 

3945.  Tn  the  numerous  cases  of  force  acting  at  a  distance,  the 
philosoTDher  has  gradually  learned  that  it  is  by  no  means  sufficient 
to  rest  satisfied  with  the  mere  fact,  and  has  therefore  directed  his 
attention  to  the  manner  in  which  the  force  is  transmitted  across 
the  intervening  space  ;  and  even  when  he  can  learn  nothing  sure 
of  the  manner,  he  is  still  able  to  make  clear  distinctions  in 
different  cases,  by  what  may  be  called  the  affections  of  the  lines 
of  power:  and  thus,  by  these  and  other  means,  to  make  di- 
stinctions in  the  nature  of  the  lines  of  force  of  different  kinds 
of  power  as  compared  with  each  other,  and  therefore  be- 
tween the  powers  to  whi^h  they  belong.    In  the  action  of 
a-ravity,  for  instance,  the  line  offeree  is  a  straight  hue  as  far  as 
we  can  test  it  by  the  resultant  pha^nomena.    It  cannot  be  de- 
flected, or  even  affected,  in  its  course.    Neither  is  the  action  in 
one  line  at  all  influenced,  either  in  direction  or  amount,  by  a  hke 
action  in  another  line ;  i.  e.  one  particle  gravitating  toward 


June  1852.]  gravity— radiant  forces.  409 

another  particle  has  exactly  the  same  amount  of  force  in  the 
same  direction,  whether  it  gravitates  to  that  one  alone  or  towards 
myriads  of  other  like  particles,  exerting  in  the  latter  case  upon 
each  one  of  them  a  force  equal  to  that  which  it  can  exert  upon 
the  single  one  when  alone :  the  results  of  course  can  combine, 
but  the  direction  and  amount  of  force  between  any  two  given 
particles  remain  unchanged.  So  gravity  presents  us  with  the 
simplest  case  of  attraction  ;  and  appearing  to  have  no  relation  to 
any  physical  process  by  which  the  power  of  the  particles  is  carried 
on  between  them,  seems  to  be  a  pure  case  of  attraction  or  action 
at  a  distance,  and  offers  therefore  the  simplest  type  of  the  cases 
which  may  be  like  it  in  that  respect.  My  object  is  to  consider 
how  far  magnetism  is  such  an  action  at  a  distance ;  or  how  far 
it  may  partake  of  the  nature  of  other  powers,  the  lines  of  M'hich 
depend,  for  the  communication  offeree,  upon  intermediate  phy- 
sical agencies  (3075.). 

3246.  There  is  one  question  in  relation  to  gravity,  which,  if 
we  could  ascertain  or  touch  it,  would  greatly  enlighten  us.  It 
is,  whether  gravitation  requires  time.  If  it  did,  it  would  show  un- 
deniably that  a  physical  agency  existed  in  the  course  of  the  line 
of  force.  It  seems  equally  impossible  to  prove  or  disprove  this 
point ;  since  there  is  no  capability  of  suspending,  changing,  or 
annihilating  the  power  (gravity),  or  annihilating  the  matter  in 
which  the  power  resides. 

3247.  When  we  turn  to  radiation  pheenoraena,  then  we  obtain 
the  highest  proof,  that  though  nothing  ponderable  passes,  yet 
the  lines  of  force  have  a  physical  existence  independent,  in  a 
manner,  of  the  body  i-adiating,  or  of  the  body  receiving  the  rays. 
They  may  be  turned  aside  in  their  course,  and  then  deviate  from 
a  straight  into  a  bent  or  a  curved  line.    They  may  be  affected 
in  their  nature  so  as  to  be  turned  on  their  axis,  or  else  to  have 
different  properties  impressed  on  different  sides.    Their  sum  of 
power  is  limited ;  so  that  if  the  force,  as  it  issues  from  its  source, 
is  directed  on  to  or  determined  upon  a  given  set  of  particles,  or 
in  a  given  direction,  it  cannot  be  in  any  degree  directed  upon 
other  particles,  or  into  another  direction,  without  being  propor- 
tionately removed  from  the  first.    The  lines  have  no  dependence 
upon  a  second  or  reacting  body,  as  in  gravitation ;  and  they 
require  time  for  their  propagation.    In  all  these  things  they  are 
in  marked  contrast  with  the  lines  of  gravitating  force. 

3248.  When  we  turn  to  the  electric  force,  w^  are  presented 


410 


Physical  lines  of  force: — 


[June  1852. 


with  a  very  remarkable  general  condition  intermediate  between 
the  conditions  of  the  two  former  cases.    The  power  (and  its 
lines)  here  requires  the  presmce  of  two  or  more  acting  particles 
or  masses,  as  in  the  case  of  gravity;  and  cannot  exist  with  one 
only,  as  in  the  case  of  light.    But  though  two  particles  are  re- 
quisite, they  must  be  in  an  antithetical  condition  in  respect  of 
each  other,  and  not,  as  in  the  case  of  gravity,  alike  in  relation  to 
the  force.    The  poM^er  is  now  dual ;  there  it  was  simple.  Re- 
quiring two  or  more  particles  like  gravity,  it  is  unlike  gravity  in 
that  the  power  is  limited.    One  electro -particle  cannot  affect  a 
second,  third  and  fourth,  as  much  as  it  does  the  first ;  to  act 
upon  the  latter  its  power  must  be  proportionately  removed  from 
the  former,  and  this  limitation  appears  to  exist  as  a  necessity 
in  the  dual  character  of  the  force ;  for  the  two  states,  or  places, 
or  directions  of  force  must  be  equal  to  each  other. 

3249.  With  the  electric  force  we  have  both  the  static  and 
dynamic  state.    I  use  these  words  merely  as  names,  without 
pretending  to  have  a  clear  notion  of  the  physical  condition  which 
they  seem  meaningly  to  imply.    Whether  there  are  two  fluids  or 
one,  or  any  fluid  of  electricity,  or  such  a  thing  as  may  be  rightly 
called  a  current,  I  do  not  know ;  still  there  are  well-estabhshed 
electric  conditions  and  effects  which  the  words  static,  dynamic, 
and  current  are  generally  employed  to  express ;  and  with  this 
reservation  they  express  them  as  well  as  any  other.    The  Imes 
of  force  of  the  static  condition  of  electricity  are  present  in  all 
cases  of  induction.    They  terminate  at  the  surfaces  of  the  con- 
ductors under  induction,  or  at  the  particles  of  non-conductors, 
which,  being  electrified,  are  in  that  condition.    They  are  subject 
to  inflection  in  their  course  (1215.  1230.),  and  may  be  compressed 
or  rarefied  by  bodies  of  different  inductive  capacities  (1252. 
1277.) ;  but  they  are  in  those  cases  affected  by  the  intervening 
matter;  and  it  is  not  certain  how  the  line  of  electric  force  would 
exist  in  relation  to  a  perfect  vacuum,  i.  e.  whether  it  would  be  a 
straight  line,  as  that  of  gravity  is  assumed  to  be,  or  curved  in 
such  a  manner  as  to  show  something  like  physical  existence 
separate  from  the  mere  distant  actions  of  the  surfaces  or  par- 
ticles bounding  or  terminating  the  induction.    No  condition  of 
quality  or  polarity  has  as  yet  been  discovered  in  the  hne  of  static 
electric  force ;  nor  has  any  relation  of  time  been  established  in 
respect  of  it. 

3250.  The  lines  of  force  of  dynamic  electricity  are  either 


June  1852.]         of  electricity — distinctions.  411 

limited  in  their  extent,  as  in  the  lowering  by  discliargc,  or 
otherwise  of  the  inductive  condition  of  static  electricity;  or 
endless  and  continuous,  as  closed  curves  in  the  case  of  a  voltaic 
circuit.  Being  definite  in  their  amount  for  a  given  source,  they 
can  still  be  expanded,  contracted,  and  deflected  almost  to  any 
extent,  according  to  the  nature  and  size  of  the  media  through 
which 'they  pass,  and  to  which  they  have  a  direct  relation.  It  is 
probable  that  matter  is  always  essentially  present ;  but  the  hypo- 
thetical tether  may  perhaps  be  admitted  here  as  well  as  elsewhere. 
No  condition  of  quality  or  polarity  has  as  yet  been  recognized  in 
them.  In  respect  of  time,  it  has  been  found,  in  the  case  of  a 
Leyden  discharge,  that  time  is  necessary  even  with  the  best  con- 
ductors ;  indeed  there  is  reason  to  think  it  is  as  necessary  there 
as  in  the  cases  dependent  on  bad  conducting  media,  as,  for  in- 
stance, in  the  lightning  flash. 

3251.  Three  great  distinctions  at  least  may  be  taken  among 
these  cases  of  the  exertion  of  force  at  a  distance  ;  that  of  gravita- 
tion, where  propagation  of  the  force  by  physical  lines  through  the 
intermediate  space  is  not  supposed  to  exist ;  that  of  radiation, 
where  the  propagation  does  exist,  and  where  the  propagating  line 
or  ray,  once  produced,  has  existence  independent  either  of  its 
source,  or  termination  ;  and  that  of  electricity,  where  the  propa- 
gating process  has  intermediate  existence,  like  a  ray,  but  at  the 
same  time  depends  upon  both  extremities  of  the  line  of  force,  or 
upon  conditions  (as  in  the  connected  voltaic  pile)  equivalent  to 
such  extremities.    Magnetic  action  at  a  distance  has  to  be  com- 
pared with  these.    It  may  be  unlike  any  of  them  ;  for  who  shall 
say  we  are  aware  of  all  the  physical  methods  or  forms  under 
which  force  is  communicated  ?    It  has  been  assumed,  however, 
by  some,  to  be  a  pure  case  of  force  at  a  distance,  and  so  like  that 
of  gravity  ;  whilst  others  have  considered  it  as  better  represented 
by  the  idea  of  streams  of  power.     The  question  at  present 
appears  to  be,  whether  the  Unes  of  magnetic  force  have  or  have 
not  a  physical  existence ;  and  if  they  have,  whether  such  phy- 
sical existence  has  a  static  or  dynamic  form  (3075.  3156.  3172. 
3173.). 

3252.  The  lines  of  magnetic  force  have  not  as  yet  been 
affected  in  their  (qualities,  i.  e.  nothing  analogous  to  the  polariza- 
tion of  a  ray  of  light  or  heat  has  been  impressed  on  them.  A 
relation  between  them  and  the  rays  of  light  when  polarized  has 


412  Physical  lines  of  magnetic  force : —  [ J  u  n  e  1 85  2 . 

been  discovered  (2146.)  ^ ;  but  it  is  not  of  such  a  nature  as  to 
give  proof  as  yet,  either  that  the  lines  of  magnetic  force  have  a 
separate  existence,  or  that  they  have  not ;  though  I  think  the 
facts  are  in  favour  of  the  former  supposition.  The  investigation 
is  an  open  one,  and  very  important. 

3253.  No  relation  of  time  to  the  lines  of  magnetic  force  has 
as  yet  been  discovered.  That  iron  requires  time  for  its  mag- 
netization is  well  known.  Pliicker  says  the  same  is  the  case  for 
bismuth,  but  I  have  not  been  able  to  obtain  the  effect  showing 
this  result.  If  that  were  the  case,  then  mere  space  with  its 
aether  ought  to  have  a  similar  relation,  for  it  comes  between  bis- 
muth and  iron  (2787.)  ;  and  such  a  result  would  go  far  to  show 
that  the  hnes  of  magnetic  force  have  a  separate  physical  existence. 
At  present  such  results  as  we  have  cannot  be  accepted  as  in  any 
degree  proving  the  point  of  time ;  though  if  that  point  were 
proved,  they  would  most  probably  come  under  it.  It  may  be  as 
well  to  state,  that  in  the  case  also  of  the  moving  wire  or  con- 
ductor (125.  3076.),  time  is  required 2.  There  seems  no  hope 
of  touching  the  investigation  by  any  method  like  those  we  are 
able  to  apply  to  a  ray  of  light,  or  to  the  current  of  the  Leyden 
discharge;  but  the  mere  statement  of  the  problem  may  help 
towards  its  solution. 

3254.  If  an  action  in  curved  hnes  or  directions  could  be  proved 
to  exist  in  the  case  of  the  lines  of  magnetic  force,  it  would  also 
prove  their  physical  existence  external  to  the  magnet  on  which 
they  might  depend  ;  just  as  the  same  proof  applies  in  the  case 
of  static  electric  induction  But  the  smiple  disposition  of  the 
Unes,  as  they  are  shown  by  iron  particles,  cannot  as  yet  be 
brought  in  proof  of  such  a  curvature,  because  they  may  be  de- 
pendent upon  the  presence  of  these  particles  and  their  mutual 
action  on  each  other  and  the  magnets ;  and  it  is  possible  that 
attractions  and  repulsions  in  right  hnes  might  produce  the  same 
arrangement.  The  results  therefore  obtained  by  the  movnig 
wire  (:3076.  3176.)  are  more  likely  to  supply  data  fitted  to  elu- 
cidate this  point,  when  they  are  extended,  and  the  true  magnetic 
relation  of  the  moving  wire  to  the  space  which  it  occupies  is 
fully  ascertained. 

'  Philosophical  Transactioiis,  1846,  p.  1. 
2  Experimental  Researches,  8vo  edition,  vol.  ii.  pp.  191,  195. 
Philosophical  Transactions,  1838,  p.  16.  "  Ibid.  1852. 


June  1852.]    their  definite  character  and  amount.  413 

3255.  The  amount  of  the  lines  of  magnetic  force,  or  the  force 
which  they  represent,  is  clearly  limited,  and  therefore  quite  un- 
like the  force  of  gravity  in  that  respect  (3245)  ;  and  this  is  true, 
even  though  the  force  of  a  magnet  in  free  space  must  be  con- 
ceived of  as  extending  to  incalculable  distances.    This  limitation 
in  amount  of  force  appears  to  be  intimately  dependent  upon  the 
dual  nature  of  the  power,  and  is  accompanied  by  a  displacement 
or  removability  of  it  from  one  object  to  another,  utterly  unlike 
anything  which  occurs  in  gravitation.    The  lines  of  force  abut- 
ting on  one  end  or  pole  of  a  magnet  may  be  changed  in  their 
direction  almost  at  pleasure  (3238.),  though  the  original  seats  of 
their  further  parts  may  otherwise  remain  the  same.    For,  by 
bringing  fresh  terminals  of  power  into  presence,  a  new  disposi- 
tion of  the  force  upon  them  may  be  occasioned ;  but  though 
these  may  be  made,  either  in  part  or  entirely,  to  receive  the 
external  power,  and  thus  alter  its  direction,  no  change  in  the 
amount  of  the  force  is  thus  produced.    And  this  is  the  case  in 
strict  experiments,  whether  the  new  bodies  introduced  are  soft 
iron  or  magnets  (3218.  3223.)^    In  this  respect,  therefore,  the 
lines  of  magnetic  force  and  of  electric  force  agree.    Results  of 
this  kind  are  well  shown  in  some  recent  experiments  on  the 
effect  of  iron,  when  passing  by  a  copper  wire  in  the  magnetic 
field  of  a  horseshoe  magnet  (3129.  3130.),  and  also  by  the  action 
of  iron  and  magnets  on  each  other  (3218.  3223.). 

3256.  It  is  evident,  I  think,  that  the  experimental  data  are 
as  yet  insufficient  for  a  full  comparison  of  the  various  lines  of 
power.  They  do  not  enable  us  to  conclude,  with  much  assu- 
rance, whether  the  magnetic  lines  of  force  are  analogous  to  those 
of  gravitation,  or  direct  actions  at  a  distance ;  or  whether,  having 
a  physical  existence,  they  are  more  like  in  their  nature  to  those 
of  electric  induction  or  the  electric  current.  I  incline  at  present 
to  the  latter  view  more  than  to  the  former,  and  will  proceed  to 
certain  considerations  bearing  on  the  question,  with  a  view  to 
the  further  and  future  elucidation  of  the  subject. 


3237.  I  think  I  have  understood  that  the  mathematical  ex- 
pression of  the  laws  of  magnetic  action  at  a  distance  is  the  same 
as  that  of  the  laws  of  static  electric  actions ;  and  it  has  been 


'  Philosopliica!  Transactions,  1852. 


414  Physical  lines  of  magnetic  force.    [June  1852. 

assumed  at  times  that  the  supposition  of  north  and  south  mag- 
netisms, spread  over  the  poles  or  respective  ends  of  a  magnet, 
would  account  for  all  its  external  actions  on  other  magnets  or 
bodies.    In  either  the  static  or  dynamic  view,  or  in  any  other 
view  like  them,  the  exertion  of  the  magnetic  forces  outwards,  at 
the  poles  or  ends  of  the  magnet,  must  be  an  essential  condition. 
Then,  wdth  a  given  bar-magnet,  can  these  forces  exist  without  a 
mutual  relation  of  the  two,  or  else  a  relation  to  contrary  mag- 
netic forces  of  equal  amount  originating  in  other  sources  ?  I 
do  not  believe  they  can ;  because,  as  I  have  shown  in  recent 
researches,  the  sum  of  the  lines  of  force  is  equal  for  any  sec- 
tion across  them  taken  anywhere  externally  between  the  poles 
(3109.).    Besides  that,  there  are  many  other  experimental  facts 
which  show  the  relation  and  connexion  of  the  forces  at  one  pole 
to  those  at  the  other  ^ ;  and  there  is  also  the  analogy  with  static 
electrical  induction,  where  the  one  electricity  cannot  exist  without 
relation  to,  equality  with,  and  dependence  on  the  other.  Every 
dual  power  appears  subject  to  this  law  as  a  law  of  necessity.  If 
the  opposite  magnetic  forces  could  be  independent  of  each  other, 
then  it  is  evident  that  a  charge  with  one  magnetism  only  is  pos- 
sible ;  but  such  a  possibility  is  negatived  by  every  known  expe- 
riment and  fact. 

3258.  But  supposing  this  necessary  relation,  which  constitutes 
polarity,  to  exist,  then  how  is  it  sustained  or  permitted  in  the 
case  of  an  independent  bar-magnet  situated  in  free  space?  It 
appears  to  me,  that  the  outer  forces  at  the  poles  can  only  have 
relation  to  each  other  by  curved  lines  of  force  through  the  sur- 
rounding space ;  and  I  cannot  conceive  curved  lines  of  force 
without  the  conditions  of  a  physical  existence  in  that  interme- 
diate space.    If  they  exist,  it  is  not  by  a  succession  of  particles, 
as  in  the  case  of  static  electric  induction  (1215.  1231.),  but  by 
the  condition  of  space  free  from  such  material  particles.  A 
magnet  placed  in  the  middle  of  the  best  vacuum  we  can  pro- 
duce, and  whether  that  vacuum  be  formed  in  a  space  previously 
occupied  by  paramagnetic  or  diamagnetic  bodies,  acts  as  well 
upon  a  needle  as  if  it  were  surrounded  by  air,  water  or  glass ; 

1  The  manner  in  which  a  large  powerful  magnet  deranges,  overpowers, 
and  even  inverts  the  magnetism  of  a  smaller  magnet,  when  it  is  brought 
near  it  in  different  directions  without  touching  it,  presents  a  number  of  such 
cases.  » 


June  1852.]       Duality  of  the  magnetic  force.  415 

and  therefore  these  lines  exist  in  such  a  vacuum  as  well  as 
where  there  is  matter. 

3259.  It  may  perhaps  be  said  that  there  is  no  proof  of  any 
outer  lines  of  force,  in  the  case  of  a  magnet,  except  when  the 
objects  employed  experimentally  to  show  these  lines,  as  a  mag- 
netic needle,  soft  iron,  a  moving  wire,  or  a  crystal  of  bismuth, 
are  present ;  that  these  bodies,  in  fact,  cause  and  develope  the 
lines ;  just  as  in  the  case  of  gravity  no  idea  of  a  line  of  gravita- 
ting force,  in  respect  of  a  particle  of  matter  by  itself,  can  be 
formed:  the  idea  exists  only  when  a  second  particle  is  con- 
cerned. We  are  dealing,  however,  with  a  dual  power ;  and  we 
know  that  we  cannot  call  into  action,  by  magnetic  induction 
upon  soft  iron  or  by  electric  currents,  or  otherwise,  one  mag- 
netism without  the  other.  Supposing,  therefore,  a  bar  of  soft 
iron,  or  another  bar-magnet,  when  brought  end  on  and  near  to 
the  first  magnet,  did  by  that  approach  develope  the  external 
force,  the  power  which  then  only  would  become  external  should 
produce  a  corresponding  external  force  of  the  contrary  kind  at 
the  opposite  extremity,  or  should  not.  If  the  first  case  occurs, 
it  should  be  accompanied  by  the  development  of  Hues  of  force 
equivalent  to  it  within  the  magnet.  But  I  think  we  know,  now, 
that  in  a  very  hard  and  perfect  magnet  there  is  no  change  of 
this  kind  (3223.).  The  outer  and  the  inner  lines  of  force  remain 
the  same  in  amount,  whether  the  secondary  magnet  or  the  soft 
iron  is  present  or  away.  It  is  the  disposition  only  of  the  outer 
lines  that  is  changed  ;  their  sum,  and  therefore  their  existence, 
remains  the  same.  If  the  second  case  occurs,  then  the  magnet, 
if  broken  in  half  under  induction,  should  present  in  its  fragments 
cases  of  absolute  magnetic  charge,  or  charge  with  one  magnetism 
only  (3257.  3261.). 

3260.  Or  if  it  be  imagined  for  a  moment,  that  the  two  polari- 
ties of  the  bar-magnet  are  in  relation  to  each  other,  but  that 
whilst  there  is  no  external  object  to  be  acted  upon  they  are 
related  to  each  other  through  the  magnet  itself  (an  idea  very 
difficult  to  conceive  after  the  experimental  demonsti'ation  of  the 
course  of  the  lines  as  closed  curves  (3117.  3230.)),  still  it  would 
follow,  that  upon  the  forces  being  determined  externally,  a 
change  in  the  sum  of  force  both  within  and  without  the  magnet 
should  be  caused.  We  can  now,  however,  take  cognizance  of 
both  these  portions  of  force ;  and  it  appears  that,  with  a  good 


416  Physical  lines  of  magnetic  force.  [JuNElb52. 

magnet,  whether  alone  or  under  the  influence  of  soft  iron  or 
other  magnets  of  fourfold  strength,  the  sum  of  forces  without 
(3223.),  and  therefore  also  within  (3117.  3121.)  the  magnet 
remains  the  same. 

3261.  If  the  northness  and  southness  be  considered  so  far  in- 
dependent of  each  other  as  to  be  compared  to  two  fluids  diffused 
over  the  two  ends  of  the  magnet  (like  the  two  electricities  over  a 
polarized  conductor),  then  breaking  the  magnet  in  half  ought  to 
leave  the  two  parts,  one  absolutely  or  differentially  north  in 
character,  and  the  other  south.    Each  should  not  be  both  north 
and  south  in  equality  of  proportion,  considering  only  the  external 
force.    But  this  never  happens.    If  it  be  said  that  the  new  frac- 
ture renders  manifest,  externally,  two  new  poles,  opposite  in 
kind  but  equal  in  force  (which  is  the  fact),  because  of  the  neces- 
sity of  the  case,  then  the  same  necessity  exists  also  for  the  depen- 
dence and  relation  of  the  original  poles  of  the  original  magnet, 
no  matter  what  or  where  the  first  source  of  the  power  may  be 
But  in  that  case  the  curved  lines  of  force  between  the  poles  of 
the  original  magnet  follow  as  a  consequence;  and  the  curvature 
of  these  lines  appears  to  me  to  indicate  their  physical  existence. 

3262.  If  the  magnetic  poles  in  a  bar-magnet  be  supposed  to 
exerl:  some  kind  of  power  internally,  backward,  as  if  they  were 
centres  of  force,  both  within  and  without  the  magnet,  by  which 
they  are  able,  upon  the  breaking  of  the  magnet,  to  develope  the 
contrary  poles  and  their  force,  then  that  power  cannot  be  the 
identical  portion  which  is  at  the  same  time  exerted  externally ; 
and  if  not  the  same,  then  when  the  magnet  is  broken,  the  two 
halves  ought  to  have  a  degt^ee  of  north  or  south  charge.  They 
ought  not  to  be  determinate  magnets  having  equipotential  poles. 
But  they  are  so  ;  and  we  may  break  a  hard  magnet  in  /ic// whilst 
opposed  to  another  powerful  magnet  which  ought  most  to  disturb 
the  forces,  and  yet  the  broken  halves  are  perfect  magnets,  equi- 
valent in  their  polarities,  just  as  if,  when  they  were  made  by 
breaking,  the  dominant  magnet  was  away.    The  power  at  the 
old  poles  is  neither  increased  nor  diminished,  but  remains  m 
amount  and  in  polar  direction  unchanged.  ^     ,  , 

3263.  Falling  back,  therefore,  upon  the  case  of  a  hard,  well- 
made  and  well-charged  straight  bar-magnet,  subject  only  to  its 
own  powers,  it  appears  to  me  that  we  must  either  deny  the  joint 
external  relation  of  the  poles,  and  consider  them  as  having  no 


June  1852.]    Relation  between  the  poles  of  a  maijnet.  417 

mutual  tendency  towards  or  action  upon  each  other,  or  else 
admit  that  there  is  such  an  action  exerted  in  or  transmitted  on 
through  curved  lines.  To  deny  such  an  action,  would  be  to  set 
up  a  distinction  between  the  action  of  the  north  end  of  a  bar 
upon  its  south  end,  and  its  action  upon  the  south  end  of  other 
magnets,  which,  in  the  face  of  all  the  old  experiments,  and  the 
new  ones  made  with  the  moving  wire  (3076.),  it  appears  to  me 
impossible  to  admit.  To  acknowledge  the  action  in  curved  lines, 
seems  to  me  to  imply  at  once  that  the  lines  have  a  physical  exist- 
ence. It  may  be  a  vibration  of  the  hypothetical  aether,  or  a 
state  or  tension  of  that  aether  equivalent  to  either  a  dynamic  or 
a  static  condition ;  or  it  may  be  some  other  state,  which  though 
difficult  to  conceive,  may  be  equally  distinct  from  the  supposed 
non-existence  of  the  hue  of  gravitating  force,  and  the  indepen- 
dent and  separate  existence  of  the  Une  of  radiant  force  (3251.)  ^ 
Still  the  existence  of  the  state  does  not  appear  to  me  -to  be  mere 
assumption  or  hypothesis,  but  to  follow  in  some  degree  as  a 
consequence  of  the  known  condition  of  the  force  concerned,  and 
the  facts  dependent  on  it. 

3264.  T  have  not  referred  in  the  foregoing  considerations  to 
the  view  I  have  recently  supported  by  experimental  evidence, 
that  the  lines  of  force,  considered  simply  as  representants  of  the 
magnetic  power  (31l7-)5  ^i'^  closed  curves,  passing  in  one  part 
of  their  course  through  the  magnet,  and  in  the  other  part  through 
the  space  around  it.  These  lines  are  identical  in  their  nature, 
qualities  and  amount,  both  within  the  magnet  and  without.  If 
to  these  lines,  as  formerly  defined  (307 1.)?  we  add  the  idea  of 
physical  existence,  and  then  reconsider  such  of  the  cases  which 
have  just  been  mentioned  as  come  under  the  new  idea,  it  will  be 
seen  at  once  that  the  probability  of  curved  external  lines  of  force, 
and  therefore  of  the  physical  existence  of  the  lines,  is  as  great, 
and  even  far  greater,  than  before.  For  now  no  back  action  in 
the  magnet  could  be  supposed ;  and  the  external  relation  and 
dependence  of  the  polarities  (3257-  3263.)  would,  if  it  were  pos- 
sible, be  even  more  necessary  than  before.  Such  a  view  would 
tend  to  give,  but  not  necessarily,  a  dynamic  form  to  the  idea  of 
magnetic  force;  and  its  close  relation  to  dynamic  electricity  is 
well  k  nown  (3265.)    This  I  will  proceed  to  examine ;  but  before 

'  See  Eulei's  views  of  the  disposition  of  the  magnetic  force  ;  also  of  the 
magnetic  fluid,  or  cether  and  its  streams.    Letters,  vol.  ii.  letters  62,  63. 
VOL,  III.  2  ]C 


418  Physical  lines  of  magnetic  force.    [June  1852. 

doing  so,  will  again  look  for  a  moment  at  static  electric  induc- 
tion, as  a  case  of  the  dual  powers  in  mutual  dependence  by 
curved  lines  of  force,  but  with  these  lines  terminated,  and  not 
existing  as  closed  circuits.    An  electric  conductor  polarized  by 
induction,  or  an  insulated,  unconnected,  rectilineal,  voltaic  bat- 
tery presents  such  a  case,  and  resembles  a  magnet  in  the  dispo- 
sition of  the  external  lines  of  force.    But  the  sustaining  action 
(as  regards  the  induction)  being  dependent  upon  the  necessary 
relation  of  the  opposite  dual  conditions  of  the  force,  is  external 
to  the  conductor,  or  the  battery ;  and  in  such  a  case,  if  the  con- 
ductor or  battery  be  separated  in  the  middle,  no  charge  appears 
there,  nor  any  origin  of  new  lines  of  inductive  force.    This  is, 
no  doubt,  a  consequence  of  the  fact,  that  the  lines  of  static  in- 
ductive force  are  not  continued  internally ;  and,  at  the  same  time, 
a  cause  why  the  two  divided  portions  remain  in  opposite  states 
or  absolutely  charged.    In  the  magnet  such  a  division  does  de- 
velope  new  external  lines  of  force ;  which  being  equal  in  amount 
to  those  dependent  on  the  original  poles,  shows  that  the  hnes  of 
force  are  continuous  through  the  body  of  the  magnet,  and  with 
that  continuity  gives  the  necessary  reason  why  no  absolute  charge 
of  northness  or  southness  is  found  in  the  two  halves. 

3265  The  well-known  relation  of  the  electric  and  magnetic 
forces  may  be  thus  stated.  Let  two  rings,  in  planes  at  right 
angles  to  each  other,  represent  them,  as  m  Plate  IV  fig.  1.  It 
a  current  of  electricity  be  sent  round  the  ring  E  m  the  direction 
marked,  then  lines  of  magnetic  force  will  be  produced,  corre- 
spondent to  the  polarity  indicated  by  a  J^PP°«^^  ^^Sf 
needle  placed  at  NS,  or  in  any  other  part  of  the  ring  M  to  which 
such  a  needle  may  be  supposed  to  be  shifted.  As  these  ring 
represent  the  lines  of  electro-dynamic  force  and  of  magnetu. 
force  respectively,  they  will  serve  for  a  standai-d  of  comparison. 
I  have  elsewhere  called  the  electric  current,  or  the  line  of  electro- 
dynLic  force,  «  an  axis  of  power  having  cont.^^  fo;.es  exactly 
equal  in  amount  in  contrary  directions     (517.)-  ^^^^  ot 

magnetic  force  may  be  described  in  precisely  the  same  terms ;  and 
the!e  two  axes  of  power,  considered  as  right  ines,  are  perpendi- 
cu  L  leach  other;  with  this  additional  condition,  which  deter- 
mtes  the  mutual  direction,  that  they  are  separated  by  a  right 
Une  pe  pendicular  to  both.  The  meaning  of  the  words  above 
hen  applied  to  the  electric  current,  is  precise,  and  does  not 


June  1852.]  Relation  between  the  magnetic  and  electric  axes.  419 


imply  that  the  forces  are  contrary  because  they  are  in  reverse 
directions,  but  are  contrary  in  nature;  the  turning  one  round, 
end  for  end,  would  not  at  all  make  it  resemble  the  other ;  a  con- 
sideration which  may  have  influence  with  those  who  admit  elec- 
tric fluids,  and  endeavour  to  decide  whether  there  are  one  or 
two  electricities. 

3266.  When  these  two  axes  of  power  are  compared,  they  have 
some  remarkable  correspondences,  especially  in  relation  to  their 
position  at  right  angles  to  each  other.  As  a  physical  fact,  Am- 
pere ^  and  Davy^  have  shown,  that  an  electric  current  tends  to 
elongate  itself ;  and,  so  far,  that  may  be  considered  as  marking 
a  character  of  the  electric  axis  of  power.  When  a  free  magnetic 
needle  near  the  end  of  a  bar-magnet  first  points  and  then  tends 
to  approach  it,  I  see  in  the  action  a  character  of  the  contrary 
kind  in  the  magnetic  axis  of  power ;  for  the  lines  of  magnetic 
force,  which,  according  to  my  recent  researches,  are  common  to 
the  magnet  and  the  needle  (3230.),  are  shortened,  first  by  the 
motion  of  the  needle  when  it  points,  and  again  by  the  action 
which  causes  the  needle  to  approach  the  magnet.  I  think  I 
may  say,  that  all  the  other  actions  of  a  magnet  upon  magnets, 
or  soft  iron,  or  other  paramagnetic  and  diamagnetic  bodies,  are 
in  harmony  with  the  same  effect  and  conclusions. 

3267.  Again : — like  electric  currents,  or  lines  of  force,  or 
axes  of  power,  when  placed  side  by  side,  attract  each  other. 
This  is  well  known  and  well  seen,  when  wires  carrying  such  cur- 
rents are  placed  parallel  to  each  other.  But  like  magnetic  axes 
of  power  or  lines  of  force  repel  each  other :  the  parallel  case  to 
that  of  the  electric  currents  is  given,  by  placing  two  magnetic 
needles  side  by  side  with  like  poles  in  the  same  direction ;  and 
by  the  use  of  iron  filings,  numerous  pictorial  representations 
(3234.)  of  the  same  general  result  may  be  obtained. 

3268.  Now  these  effects  are  not  merely  contrasts  continued 
through  two  or  more  different  relations,  but  they  are  contrasts 
which  coincide  when  the  position  of  the  two  axes  of  power  at 
right  angles  to  each  other  are  considered  (1659.  3265.).  The 
tendency  to  elongate  in  the  electric  current,  and  the  tendency  to 
lateral  separation  of  the  magnetic  lines  of  force  which  surround 
that  current,  are  both  tendencies  in  the  same  direction,  though 
they  seem  like  contrasts,  when  the  two  axes  are  considered  out 

'  Ann.  de  Chim.  1822,  vol.  xxi.  p.  47.  ^  Phil.  Trans.  1823,  p.  153. 

2  E  2 


420  Physical  lines  of  magnetic  force.    [June  1852. 

of  their  relation  of  mutual  position ;  and  this,  with  other  consi- 
derations to  be  immediately  referred  to,  probably  points  to  the 
intimate  physical  relation,  and  it  may  be,  to  the  oneness  of  con- 
dition of  that  which  is  apparently  two  powers  or  forms  of  power, 
electric  and  magnetic.    In  that  case  many  other  relations,  of 
which  the  following  are  some  forms,  will  merge  in  the  same  result. 
Thus,  unlike  magnetic  lines,  when  end  on,  repel  each  other,  as 
when  similar  poles  are  face  to  face  ;  and  unlike  electric  currents, 
if  placed  in  the  same  relation,  stop  each  other ;  or  if  raised  in 
intensity,  when  thus  made  static,  repel  each  other.   Like  electric 
currents  or  lines  of  force,  when  end  on  to  each  other,  coalesce ; 
like  magnetic  lines  of  force  similarly  placed  do  so  too  (3266. 
3295.).    Like  electric  currents,  end  to  end,  do  not  add  their 
sums;  but  whilst  there  is  no  change  in  quantity,  the  intensity 
is  increased.    Like  magnetic  lines  of  force,  similarly  placed  do 
not  increase  each  other,  for  the  power  then  also  remains  the 
same  (3218.)  :  perhaps  some  effect  correspondent  to  the  gain  of 
intensity  in  the  former  case  may  be  produced,  but  there  is  none 
as  yet  distinctly  recognised.  Like  electric  currents,  side  by  side, 
add  their  quantities  together ;  a  case  supplied  either  by  uniting 
several  batteries  by  their  like  ends,  or  comparing  a  large  plate 
battery  with  a  small  one.    Like  magnetic  lines  of  force  do  the 
same  (3232.). 

3269.  The  mutual  relation  of  the  magnetic  lines  of  force  and 
the  electric  axis  of  power  has  been  known  ever  since  the  time  of 
CErsted  and  Ampere.    This,  with  such  considerations  as  I  have 
endeavoured  to  advance,  enables  us  to  form  a  guess  or  judge- 
ment, with  a  certain  degree  of  probability,  respecting  the  nature 
of  the  Hnes  of  magnetic  force.    I  incUne  to  the  opinion  that  they 
have  a  physical  existence  correspondent  to  that  of  their  analogue, 
the  electric  lines ;  and  having  that  notion,  am  further  carried  on 
to  consider  whether  they  have  a  probable  dynamic  condition,  ana- 
logous to  that  of  the  electric  axis  to  which  they  are  so  closely 
and,  perhaps,  inevitably  related,  in  which  case  the  idea  of  mag- 
netic currents  would  arise ;  or  whether  they  consist  m  a  state  of 
tension  (of  the  ather?)  round  the  electric  axis,  and  may  there- 
fore be  considered  as  static  in  their  nature.    Again  and  again 
the  idea  of  an  electro-tonic  state  (60.  1114.  1661.  1729.  1733.) 
has  been  forced  on  my  mind ;  such  a  state  would  coincide  and 
become  identified  with  that  which  would  then  constitute  the 


June  1852.]   Indications  given  by  moving  conductors.  421 

physical  lines  of  magnetic  force.  Another  consideration  tends 
in  the  same  direction.  I  formerly  remarked  that  the  magnetic 
equivalent  to  static  electricity  was  not  known ;  for  if  the  unde- 
veloped state  of  electric  force  correspond  to  the  like  undeveloped 
condition  of  magnetic  force,  and  if  the  electric  current  or  axis 
of  electric  power  correspond  to  the  lines  of  magnetic  force  or 
axis  of  magnetic  powei',  then  there  is  no  known  magnetic  condi- 
tion which  corresponds  to  the  static  state  of  the  electric  power 
(1734.).  Now  assuming  that  the  physical  lines  of  magnetic  force 
are  currents,  it  is  very  unlikely  that  such  a  link  should  be  na- 
turally absent ;  more  unlikely,  I  think,  than  that  the  magnetic 
condition  should  depend  upon  a  state  of  tension  ;  the  more  espe- 
cially as  under  the  latter  supposition,  the  lines  of  magnetic  power 
would  have  a  physical  existence  as  positively  as  in  the  former 
case,  and  the  curved  condition  of  the  Hues,  which  seems  to  me 
such  a  necessary  admission,  according  to  the  natural  facts,  would 
become  a  possibility. 

3270.  The  considerations  which  arise  during  the  contempla- 
tion of  the  phaenomena  and  laws  that  are  made  manifest  in  the 
mutual  action  of  magnets,  currents  of  electricity,  and  moving 
conductors  (3084.  &c.),  are,  I  think,  altogether  in  favour  of  the 
physical  existence  of  the  lines  of  magnetic  force.    When  only  a 
single  magnet  is  employed  in  such  cases,  and  the  use  of  iron  or 
paramagnetic  bodies  is  dismissed,  then  there  is  no  effect  of  at- 
traction or  repulsion  or  any  ordinary  magnetic  result  produced. 
The  phaenomena  may  all  very  fairly  be  looked  upon  as  purely 
electrical,  for  they  are  such  in  character;  and  if  they  coincide 
with  magnetic  actions  (which  is  no  doubt  the  case),  it  is  pro- 
bably because  the  two  actions  are  one.    But  being  considered 
as  electrical  actions,  they  convey  a  different  idea  of  the  condition 
of  the  field  where  they  occur,  to  that  involved  in  the  thought  of 
magnetic  action  at  a  distance.    When  a  copper  wire  is  placed  in 
the  neighbourhood  of  a  bar-magnet,  it  does  not,  as  far  as  we  are 
aware  (by  the  evidence  of  a  magnetic  needle  or  other  means), 
disturb  in  the  least  degree  the  disposition  of  the  magnetic  forces, 
either  in  itself  or  in  surrounding  space.   When  it  is  moved  across 
the  lines  of  force,  a  current  of  electricity  is  developed  in  it,  or 
tends  to  be  developed ;  and  there  is  every  reason  to  believe,  that 
if  we  could  employ  a  perfect  conductor,  and  obtain  a  perfect 
result,  it  would  be  the  full  equivalent  to  the  force,  electric  or 


422  Physical  lines  of  magnetic  force.    [June  1852. 

magnetic,  which  is  exerted  in  the  place  occupied  by  the  con- 
ductor. But,  as  I  have  elsewhere  observed  (3172.),  this  cur- 
rent, having  its  full  and  equivalent  relation  to  the  magnetic 
force,  can  hardly  be  conceived  of  as  having  its  entire  foundation 
in  the  mere  fact  of  motion.  The  motion  of  an  external  body, 
otherwise  physically  indifferent,  and  having  no  relation  to  the 
magnet,  could  not  beget  a  physical  relation  such  as  that  which 
the  moving  wire  presents.  There  must,  I  think,  be  a  previous 
state,  a  state  of  tension  or  a  static  state,  as  regards  the  wire, 
which,  when  motion  is  superadded,  produces  the  dynamic  state  or 
current  of  electricity.  This  state  is  sufficient  to  constitute  and 
give  a  physical  existence  to  the  lines  of  magnetic  force,  and  permit 
the  occurrence  of  curvature  or  its  equivalent  external  relation  ol 
poles,  and  also  the  various  other  conditions,  which  I  conceive  are 
incompatible  with  mere  action  at  a  distance,  and  which  yet  do 
exist  amongst  magnetic  phaenomena. 

3271.  All  the  phsenomena  of  the  moving  wire  seem  to  me  to 
show  the  physical  existence  of  an  atmosphere  of  power  about  a 
magnet,  which,  as  the  power  is  antithetical,  and  marked  in  its 
direction  by  the  Hues  of  magnetic  force,  may  be  considered  as 
disposed  in  sphondyloids,  determined  by  the  lines,  or  rather  shells 
of  force  1.  As  the  wire  intersects  the  lines  within  a  given  sphon- 
dyloid  external  to  the  magnet,  a  current  of  electricity  is  gene- 
rated, and  that  current  is  definite  and  the  same  for  any  or  every 
intersection  of  the  given  sphondyloid.  At  the  same  time,  whether 
the  wire  be  quiescent  or  in  motion,  it  does  not  cause  derange- 
ment, or  expansion,  or  contraction  of  the  lines  of  force ;  the  state 

1  The  lines  of  magnetic  force  have  been  already  defined  (3071.).  They 
have  also  been  traced,  as  I  think,  and  shown  to  be  closed  curves  passing  in 
one  part  of  their  course  through  the  magnet  to  which  they  belong,  and  m  the 
other  part  through  space  (3117.).    If,  in  the  case  of  a  straight  bar-magnet, 
any  one  of  these  lines,  E,  be  considered  as  revolving  round  the  axis  of  the 
magnet,  it  will  describe  a  surface ;  and  as  the  line  itself  is  a  closed  curve,  the 
surface  will  form  a  tube  round  the  axis  and  inclose  a  solid  form.  Another 
line  of  force,  F,  will  produce  a  similar  result.    The  sphondyloid  body  may  be 
either  that  contained  by  the  surface  of  revolution  of  E,  or  that  contained  be- 
tween the  two  surfaces  of  E  and  F,  and  which,  for  the  sake  of  brevity,  I  have 
fbv  the  advice  of  a  kind  friend)  called  simply  the  sphondyloid.    1  he  parts  of 
the  solid  described,  which  are  within  and  without  the  magnet,  are  in  power 
eouivalent  to  each  other.    When  it  is  needful  to  speak  of  them  separately, 
they  are  easily  distinguished  as  the  inner  and  outer  sphondyloids  ;  the  surface 
of  the  magnet  being  then  part  of  the  bounding  surface. 


June  1852.]    The  magnet  as  a  source  of  power.  423 

of  the  power  iu  the  neighbouring  or  other  parts  of  the  sphondy- 
loid  remaining  sensibly  the  same  (3176.). 

3272.  The  old  experiment  of  a  wire  when  carrying  an  electric 
current '  moving  round  a  magnetic  pole,  or  of  a  current  being 
produced  in  the  same  wire  when  it  is  carried  per  force  round  the 
same  pole  (114.),  shows  the  electrical  dependence  of  the  magnet 
and  the  wire,  both  when  the  current  is  employed  from  the  first, 
and  when  it  is  generated  by  the  motion.  It  coincides  in  principle 
with  the  results  already  quoted,  and  it  includes,  experimentally, 
all  currents  of  electricity,  whatever  the  medium  in  which  they 
occur,  even  up  to  that  due  to  the  discharge  of  the  Leyden  jar 
or  that  between  the  electrodes  of  the  voltaic  battery.  I  think 
it  also  indicates  the  state  of  magnetic  or  electric  tension  in  the 
surrounding  space,  not  only  when  that  space  is  occupied  by  metal 
or  a  wire,  but  also  by  air  and  other  bodies  ;  for  whatever  be  the 
state  in  one  case,  it  is  probably  general  and  therefore  common 
to  all  (3173.). 

3273.  I  will  now  venture  for  a  time  to  assume  the  physical 
existence  of  the  external  lines  of  magnetic  force,  for  the  purpose 
of  considering  how  the  idea  will  accord  with  the  general  phaeno- 
mena  of  magnetism.    The  magnet  is  evidently  the  sustaining 
power,  and  in  respect  of  its  internal  condition  or  that  of  its  par- 
ticles, there  is  no  idea  put  forth  to  represent  it  which  at  all  ap- 
proaches in  probability  and  beauty  to  that  of  Ampere  (1659.). 
Its  analogy  with  the  helix  is  wonderful ;  nevertheless  there  is, 
as  yet,  a  striking  experimental  distinction  between  them;  for 
whereas  an  unchangeable  magnet  can  never  raise  up  a  piece  of 
soft  iron  to  a  state  more  than  equal  to  its  own,  as  measured  by 
the  moving  wire  (3219.),  a  helix  carrying  a  current  can  develope 
in  an  iron  core  magnetic  lines  of  force,  of  a  hundred  or  more 
times  as  much  power  as  that  possessed  by  itself,  when  measured 
by  the  same  means.    In  every  point  of  view,  therefore,  the  mag- 
net deserves  the  utmost  exertions  of  the  philosopher  for  the 
development  of  its  nature,  both  as  a  magnet  and  also  as  a  source 
of  electricity,  that  we  may  become  acquainted  with  the  great  law 
under  which  the  apparent  anomaly  may  disappear,  and  by  which 
all  these  various  phaenomena  presented  to  us  shall  become  one. 

3274.  The  physical  Hues  of  force,  in  passing  out  of  the  mag- 
net into  space,  present  a  great  variety  of  conditions  as  to  form 
'  Experimental  Researches,  8vo  edition,  vol.  ii.  p.  127. 


424  Physical  lines  of  magnetic  force.    [June  1852. 

(3238.).    At  times  their  refraction  is  very  sudden,  leaving  the 
magnet  at  right,  or  obtuse,  or  acute  angles,  as  in  the  case  of  a 
hard  M-ell-charged  bar-magnet,  fig.  2 ;  in  other  cases  the  change 
of  form  of  the  hne  in  passing  from  the  magnet  into  space  is  more 
gradual,  as  in  the  circular  plate  or  globe-magnet,  figs.  3,  4,  5. 
Here  the  form  of  the  magnet  as  the  source  of  the  lines  has  much 
to  do  with  the  result ;  but  I  think  the  condition  and  relation  of 
the  surrounding  medium  has  an  essential  and  evident  influence, 
in  a  manner  I  will  endeavour  to  point  out  presently.  Again, 
this  refraction  of  the  lines  is  affected  by  the  relative  difference 
of  the  nature  of  the  magnet  and  the  medium  or  space  around  it ; 
as  the  difference  is  greater,  and  therefore  the  transition  is  more 
sudden,  so  the  line  of  force  is  more  instantaneously  bent.  In 
the  case  of  the  earth,  both  the  nature  of  its  substance  and  also 
its  form,  tend  to  make  the  refractions  of  the  line  of  force  at  its 
surface  very  gradual ;  and  accordingly  the  line  of  dip  does  not 
sensibly  vary  under  ordinary  circumstances,  at  the  same  place, 
whether  it  be  observed  upon  the  surface  or  above  or  below  it. 

3275.  Though  the  physical  lines  of  force  of  a  magnet  may, 
and  must  be  considered  as  extending  to  infinite  distance  around 
it  as  long  as  the  magnet  is  absolutely  alone  (3110.),  yet  they  may 
be  condensed  and  compressed  into  a  very  small  local  space,  by 
the  influence  of  other  systems  of  magnetic  power.  This  is  indi- 
cated by  fig.  6. '  I  have  no  doubt,  after  the  experimental  results 
given  in  Series  XXVIII.  respecting  definite  magnetic  action 
(3109.),  that  the  sphondyloid  representing  the  total  power,  which 
in  the  experiment  that  supphed  the  figure  had  a  sectional  area 
of  not  two  square  inches  in  surface,  would  have  equal  power 
upon  the  moving  wire,  with  that  infinite  sphondyloid  which  would 
exist  if  the  small  magnet  were  in  free  space. 

3276.  The  magnet,  with  its  surrounding  sphondyloid  of  power, 
may  be  considered  as  analogous  in  its  condition  to  a  voltaic  bat- 
tery immersed  in  water  or  any  other  electrolyte ;  or  to  a  gym- 
notus  (1773.  1784.)  or  torpedo,  at  the  moment  when  these  crea- 
tures, at  their  own  will,  fill  the  surrounding  fluid  with  fines  of 
electric  force.  I  think  the  analogy  with  the  voltaic  battery  so 
placed,  is  closer  than  with  any  case  of  static  electric  induction, 
because  in  the  former  instance  the  physical  lines  of  electric  force 
may  be  traced  both  through  the  battery  and  its  surrounding 
medium,  for  they  form  continuous  curves  like  those  1  have  ima- 


June  1852.]  Analogy  between  the  magnet  and  a  V.  battery.  425 

giried  within  and  without  the  magnet.    The  direction  of  these 
lines  of  electric  force  may  be  traced,  experimentally,  many  ways. 
A  mao-netic  needle  freely  suspended  in  the  fluid  will  show  them 
in  and  near  to  the  battery,  by  standing  at  right  angles  to  the 
course  of  the  lines.    Two  wires  from  a  galvanometer  will  show 
them ;  for  if  the  line  joining  the  two  ends  in  the  fluid  be  at  right 
angles  to  the  Hnes  of  electric  force  (or  the  currents),  there  will 
be°no  action  at  the  galvanometer ;  but  if  oblique  or  parallel  to 
these  lines,  there  will  be  deflection.    A  plate,  or  wire,  or  ball  of 
metal  in  the  fluid  will  show  the  direction,  provided  any  electro- 
lytic action  can  go  on  against  it,  as  when  a  little  acetate  of  lead 
is  present  in  the  medium,  for  then  the  electrolysis  will  be  a 
maximum  in  the  direction  of  the  current  or  line  of  force,  and 
nothing  at  all  in  the  direction  at  right  angles  to  it.    The  same 
ball  will  disturb  and  inflect  the  lines  of  electric  force  in  the  sur- 
rounding fluid,  just  as  I  have  considered  the  case  to  be  with 
paramagnetic  bodies  amongst  magnetic  lines  of  force  (2806. 
2821.  2874.).    No  one  I  think  will  doubt  that  as  long  as  the 
battery  is  in  the  fluid,  and  has  its  extremities  in  communication 
by  the  fluid,  lines  of  electric  force  having  a  physical  existence 
occur  in  every  part  of  it,  and  the  fluid  surrounding  it. 

3277.  1  conceive  that  when  a  magnet  is  in  free  space,  there  is 
such  a  medium  (magnetically  speaking)  around  it.    That  a  va- 
cuum has  its  own  magnetic  relations  of  attraction  and  repulsion 
is  manifest  from  former  experimental  results  (2787-) ;  and  these 
place  the  vacuum  in  relation  to  material  bodies,  not  at  either 
extremity  of  the  hst,  but  in  the  midst  of  them,  as,  for  instance, 
between  gold  and  platina  (2399.),  having  other  bodies  on  either 
side  of  it.    What  that  surrounding  magnetic  medium,  deprived 
of  all  material  substance,  may  be,  I  cannot  tell,  perhaps  the 
Eether.    I  incline  to  consider  this  outer  medium  as  essential 
to  the  magnet ;  that  it  is  that  which  relates  the  external  polari- 
ties to  each  other  by  curved  lines  of  power ;  and  that  these  must 
be  so  related  as  a  matter  of  necessity.   Just  as  in  the  case  of  the 
battery  above,  there  is  no  line  of  force,  either  in  or  out  of  the 
battery,  if  this  relation  be  cut  off  by  removing  or  intercepting 
the  conducting  medium  ; — or  in  that  of  static  electric  induction, 
which  is  impossible  unUl  this  related  state  be  allowed  (1169.) ' ; — 

'  Philosophical  Magazine,  March  1843;  or  Experimental  Researches,  8vo, 
vol.  ii.  p.  279. 


426  Physical  lines  of  magnetic  force.    [June  1852. 

80  I  conceive,  that  without  this  external  mutually  related 
condition  of  the  poles,  or  a  related  condition  of  them  to  other 
poles  sustained  and  rendered  possible  in  like  manner,  a  magnet 
could  not  exist;  an  absolute  northness  or  southness,  or  an 
unrelated  northness  or  southness,  being  as  impossible  as  an 
absolute  or  an  unrelated  state  of  positive  or  negative  electricity 

,  A 

3278.  In  this  view  of  a  magnet,  the  medmra  or  space  around 
it  is  as  essential ras  the  magnet  itself,  being  apart  of  the  true  and 
complete  magnetic  system.  There  are  numerous  experimental 
results  which  show  us  that  the  relation  of  the  Unes  to  the  surround- 
ing space  can  be  varied  by  occupying  it  with  different  substances ; 
just  as  the  relation  of  a  ray  of  light  to  the  space  through  which 
it  passes  can  be  varied  by  the  presence  of  different  bodies  made 
to  occupy  that  space,  or  as  the  lines  of  electric  force  are  affected 
by  the  media  through  which  either  induction  or  conduction  takes 
place.  This  variation  in  regard  to  the  magnetic  power  may  be 
considered  as  depending  upon  the  aptitude  which  the  surround- 
ing space  has  to  effect  the  mutual  relation  of  the  two  external 
polarities,  or  to  carry  onwards  the  physical  Hne  of  force ;  and  I 
have  on  a  former  occasion  in  some  degree  considered  it  and  its 
consequences,  using  the  phrase  magnetic  conduction  to  represent 
the  physical  effect  (2797.)  produced  by  the  presence  either  of 
paramagnetic  or  diamagnetic  bodies. 

3279.  When,  for  instance,  a  piece  of  cold  iron  (3129.)  or 
nickel  (3240.)  is  introduced  into  the  magnetic  field,  previously 
occupied  by  air  or  being  even  mere  space,  there  is  a  concentration 
of  lines  of  force  on  to  it,  and  more  power  is  transmitted  through 
the  space  thus  occupied  than  if  the  paramagnetic  body  were  not 
there.  The  lines  of  force  therefore  converge  on  to  or  diverge 
from  it,  giving  what  I  have  called  conduction  polarity  (2818.) ; 
and  this  is  the  whole  effect  produced  as  regards  the  amount  of 
the  power ;  for  not  the  slightest  addition  to,  or  diminution  of, 
that  external  to  the  magnet  is  made  (3218.  3223.).  A  new  dis- 
position of  the  force  arises ;  for  some  passes  now  where  it  did 
not  pass  before,  being  removed  from  places  where  it  was  previ- 
ously transmitted.  Supposing  that  the  magnet  was  inclosed  in 
a  surrounding  solid  mass  of  iron,  then  the  effect  of  its  superior 
conducting  power  would  be  to  cause  a  great  contraction  inwards 
of  the  sphere  of  external  action,  and  of  the  various  sphondyloids. 


June  1852.]    Needle  indications  not  always  the  same.  427 

which  we  may  suppose  to  be  identified  in  different  parts  of  it. 
A  magnetic  needle,  if  it  could  be  introduced  into  the  iron  me- 
dium, would  indicate  extreme  diminution,  if  not  apparent  anni- 
hilation, of  the  external  power  of  this  magnet ;  but  the  moving 
wire  would  show  that  it  was  there  present  to  its  full  extent 
(3152.  3162.)  in  a  very  concentrated  condition,  just  as  it  shows 
it  in  the  very  body  of  a  magnet  (3116.)  ;  and  the  power  within 
the  magnet,  it  being  a  hard  and  perfect  one,  would  remain  the 
same. 

3280.  The  reason  why  a  magnetic  needle  would  fail  as  a  cor- 
rect indicator  of  the  amount  of  power  present  in  a  given  space 
is,  that  when  perfect,  it,  because  of  the  necessary  condition  of 
hardness,  cannot  carry  on  through  its  mass  more  lines  of  force 
than  it  can  excite  (3223.).    But  because  of  the  coalescence  of  like 
lines  of  force  end  on  (3226.),  such  a  needle,  when  surrounded  by 
a  bad  magnetic  conductor,  determines  on  to  itself  many  of  the 
lines  which  would  otherwise  pass  elsewhere,  has  a  high  magnetic 
polarity,  and  is  affected  in  proportion ;  every  experiment,  as  far 
^s  I  can  perceive,  tending  to  show  that  the  attractions  and  repul- 
sions are  merely  consequences  of  the  tendency  which  the  lines  of 
physical  magnetic  force  have  to  shorten  themselves  (3266.).  So 
w^hen  the  magnetic  needle  is  surrounded  by  a  medium  gradually 
increasing  in  conducting  power,  it  seems  to  show  less  and  less 
force  in  its  neighbourhood,  though  in  reality  the  force  is  increasing 
there  more  and  more.    We  can  easily  conceive  a  very  hard  and 
feebly  charged  magnetic  needle  surrounded  by  a  medium,  as  soft 
iron,  better  than  itself  in  conducting  power,  i.  e.  carrying  on  by 
conduction  more  lines  of  force  than  the  needle  could  determine 
or  carry  on  by  its  state  of  charge  (32y8.).    In  that  case  I  con- 
ceive it  would,  if  free  to  move,  point  feebly  in  the  iron,  because 
of  the  coalescence  of  the  lines  of  force,  but  would  be  repelled 
bodily  from  the  chief  magnet,  in  analogy  with  the  action  on  a 
diamagnetic  body.    As  1  have  before  stated,  the  principle  of  the 
moving  wire  can  be  applied  successfully  in  those  cases  where  that 
of  the  magnetic  needle  fails  (3155.). 

3281.  If  other  paramagnetic  bodies  than  iron  be  considered 
in  their  relation  to  the  surrounding  space,  then  their  effects  may 
be  assumed  as  proportionate  to  the  conducting  power.  If  the 
surrounding  medium  were  hard  steel,  the  contraction  of  the 
sphondyloid  of  power  would  be  much  less  than  with  iron  ;  and 


428 


Physical  lines  of  magnetic  force.    [June  1852. 


the  effects,  in  respect  of  the  magnetic  needle,  would  occur  in  a 
limited  degree.  If  a  solution  of  protosulphate  of  iron  were  used, 
the  effect  would  occur  in  a  very  much  less  degree.  If  a  solution 
were  prepared  and  adjusted  so  as  to  have  no  paramagnetic  or 
diamagnetic  relation  (2422.),  it  would  be  the  same  to  the  lines 
of  force  as  free  space.  If  a  diamagnetic  body  were  employed,  as 
water,  glass,  bismuth  or  phosphorus,  the  extent  of  action  of  the 
sphondyloids  would  expand  (3279.) ;  and  a  magnetic  needle 
would  appear  to  increase  in  intensity  of  action,  though  placed 
in  a  region  having  a  smaller  amount  of  magnetic  force  passing 
across  it  than  before  (3155.).  Whether  in  any  of  these  cases, 
even  in  that  of  iron,  the  body  acting  as  a  conductor  has  a  state 
induced  upon  its  particles  for  the  time  like  that  of  a  magnet  in 
the  corresponding  state,  is  a  question  which  I  put  upon  a  former 
occasion  (2833.) ;  but  I  leave  its  full  investigation  and  decision 
for  a  future  time. 


3282.  The  circumstances  dependent  upon  the  shape  and  size 
of  magnets  appear  to  accord  singularly  well  with  the  view  I  adi 
putting  forth  of  the  action  of  the  surrounding  medium.  If  there 
be  a  function  in  that  medium  equivalent  to  conduction,  involving 
differences  of  conduction  in  different  cases,  that  of  necessity  im- 
plies also  reaction  or  resistance.  The  differences  could  not  exist 
without.  The  analogous  case  is  presented  to  us  in  every  part 
by  the  electric  force.  When,  therefore,  a  magnet,  in  place  of 
being  a  bar,  is  made  into  a  horseshoe  form,  we  see  at  once  that 
the  lines  of  force  and  the  sphondyloids  are  greatly  distorted  or 
removed  from  their  former  regularity;  that  a  line  of  maximum 
force  from  pole  to  pole  grows  up  as  the  horseshoe  form  is  more 
completely  given ;  that  the  power  gathers  in,  or  accumulates 
about  this  line,  just  because  the  badly  conducting  medium,  L  e. 
the  space  or  air  between  the  poles,  is  shortened.  A  bent  voltaic 
battery  in  its  surrounding  medium  (3276.),  or  a  gymnotus  curved 
at  the  moment  of  its  pecuhar  action  (1785.),  present  exactly  the 
like  result. 

3283.  The  manner  in  which  the  keeper  or  sub-magnet,  when 
in  place,  reduces  the  power  of  the  magnet  in  the  space  or  air 
around,  is  evident.  It  is  the  substitution  of  an  excellent  con- 
ductor for  a  poor  one ;  far  more  of  the  power  of  the  magnet  is 
transmitted  through  it  than  through  the  same  space  before,  and 


June  1852.]        Size  and  shape  of  magnets.  429 

less,  therefore,  in  other  places.  If  a  horseshoe  magnet  be  charged 
to  saturation  with  its  keeper  on,  and  its  power  be  then  ascer- 
tained, removing  the  keeper  will  cause  the  power  to  fall.  This 
will  be  (according  to  the  hypothesis)  because  the  iron  keeper 
could,  by  its  conduction,  sustain  higher  external  conditions  of 
the  magnetic  force,  and  therefore  the  magnet  could  take  up  and 
sustain  a  higher  condition  of  charge.  The  case  passes  into  that 
of  a  steel  ring  magnet,  which  being  magnetized,  shows  no  ex- 
ternal signs  of  power,  because  the  hues  of  force  of  one  part  are 
continued  on  by  every  other  part  of  the  ring ;  and  yet  when 
broken  exhibits  strong  polarity  and  external  action,  because  then 
the  lines,  which,  being  determined  at  a  given  point,  were  before 
carried  on  through  the  continuous  magnet,  have  now  to  be  car- 
ried on  and  continued  through  the  surrounding  space. 

3284.  These  results,  again,  pass  into  the  fact,  easily  verified 
partially,  that  if  soft  iron  surround  a  magnet,  being  in  contact 
with  its  poles,  that  magnet  may  receive  a  much  higher  charge 
than  it  can  take,  being  surrounded  with  a  lower  paramagnetic 
substance,  as  air :  also  another  fact,  that  when  masses  of  soft 
iron  are  at  the  ends  of  a  magnet,  the  latter  can  receive  and  keep 
a  higher  charge  than  without  them ;  for  these  masses  carry  on 
the  physical  lines  of  force,  and  deliver  them  to  a  body  of  sur- 
rounding space ;  which  is  either  widened,  and  therefore  increased 
in  the  direction  across  the  lines  of  force,  or  shortened  in  that 
direction  parallel  to  them,  or  both ;  and  both  are  circumstances 
which  facilitate  the  conduction  from  pole  to  pole,  and  the  relation 
of  the  external  lines  to  the  lines  of  force  within  the  magnet.  In 
the  same  way  the  armature  of  a  natural  loadstone  is  useful.  All 
these  effects  and  expedients  accord  with  the  view,  that  the  space 
or  medium  external  to  the  magnet  is  as  important  to  its  exist- 
ence as  the  body  of  the  magnet  itself. 

3285.  Magnets,  whether  large  or  small,  may  be  supersaturated, 
and  then  they  fall  in  power  when  left  to  themselves ;  quickly  at 
first  if  strongly  supersaturated,  and  more  slowly  afterwards.  This, 
upon  the  hypothesis,  would  be  accounted  for  by  considering  the 
surrounding  medium  as  unable,  by  its  feeble  magneto-conducting 
power,  to  sustain  the  higher  state  of  charge.  If  the  conducting 
power  were  increased  sufficiently,  then  the  magnet  would  not  be 
supersaturated,  and  its  power  would  not  fall.  Thus,  if  a  magnet 
were  surrounded  by  iron,  it  might  easily  be  made  to  assume  and 


430 


Physical  lines  nf  magnetic  force .    [  J  u  n  e  1 8 5  2 . 


retain  a  state  of  charge,  which,  if  the  iron  were  suddenly  replaced 
by  air,  would  instantly  fall.  Indeed,  magnets  can  only  be  su- 
persaturated by  placing  them  for  the  time  under  the  dominion 
of  other  sources  of  magnetic  power,  or  of  other  more  favourable 
surrounding  media  than  that  in  which  they  manifest  themselves 
as  supersaturated. 

3286.  The  well-known  result,  that  small  bar-magnets  are  far 
stronger  in  proportion  to  their  size  than  larger  similar  magnets, 
harmonizes  and  sustains  that  view  of  the  action  of  the  external 
medium  which  has  now  been  given.    A  sewing-needle  can  be 
magnetized  far  more  strongly  than  a  bar  twelve  inches  long  and 
an  inch  in  diameter ;  and  the  reason  under  the  view  taken  is, 
that  the  excited  system  in  the  magnet  (correspondent  to  the  vol- 
taic battery  in  the  analogy  quoted  (3276.))  is  better  sustained 
by  the  necessary  conjoint  action  of  the  surrounding  medium  in 
the  case  of  the  small  magnet.    For  as  the  imperfect  magneto- 
conducting  power  of  that  medium  (or  the  consequent  state  of 
tension  into  which  it  is  thrown)  acts  back  upon  the  magnet 
(3282.),  so  the  smaller  the  sum  of  exciting  force  in  the  centre 
of  the  magnetic  sphondyloids,  the  better  able  will  the  surround- 
ing medium  be  to  do  its  part  in  sustaining  the  resultant  of  force. 
It  is  very  manifest,  that  if  the  twelve-inch  bar  be  conceived  of  as 
subdivided  into  sewing-needles,  and  these  be  separated  from  each 
other,  the  whole  amount  of  exciting  force  acts  upon,  and  is  car- 
ried onwards  in  closed  magnetic  curves,  by  a  very  much  larger 
amount  of  external  surrounding  medium  than  when  they  are  all 
accumulated  in  the  single  bar. 

3287.  The  results  which  have  been  observed  in  the  relation 
of  length  and  thickness  of  a  bar-magnet,  harmonize  with  the  view 
of  the  office  of  the  external  medium  now  urged.  If  we  take  a 
small,  well-proportioned,  saturated  magnet,  as  a  sewing-needle ; 
alone,  it  has,  as  just  stated,  such  relation  to  the  surrounding 
space  as  to  have  its  high  condition  sustained ;  if  we  place  a 
second  like  magnetic  needle  by  the  side  of  the  first,  the  surround- 
ing space  of  the  two  is  scarcely  enlarged,  it  is  not  at  all  improved 
in  conducting  character,  and  yet  it  has  to  sustain  double  the  in- 
ternal exciting  magnetic  force  exerted  when  there  was  one  needle 
only  (3232.) ;  this  must  react  back  upon  the  magnets,  and  cause 
a  reduction  of  their  power.  The  addition  of  a  third  needle  repeats 
the  effect;  and  if  we  conceive  that  successive  needles  are  added 


June  1852.]        Size  and  shape  of  magnets.  431 

until  the  bundle  is  an  inch  thick,  we  have  a  result  which  will 
illustrate  the  efFect  of  a  thickness  too  large,  and  dispro[)ortionate 
to  the  length. 

3288.  On  the  other  hand,  if  we  assume  two  such  needles 
similarly  placed  in  a  right  line  at  a  distance  from  each  other, 
each  has  its  surrounding  system  of  curves  occupying  a  certain 
amount  of  space ;  if  brought  together  by  unlike  poles,  they  form 
a  magnet  of  double  the  length  ;  the  external  hnes  of  force 
coalesce  (3226.),  those  at  the  faces  of  contact  nearly  disappear; 
those  which  proceed  from  the  extreme  poles  coalesce  externally, 
and  form  one  large  outer  system  of  force,  the  lines  of  which  have 
a  greater  length  than  the  corresponding  lines  of  either  of  the 
two  original  needles.  Still,  by  the  supposition  that  the  magnets 
are  perfectly  hard  and  invariable,  the  exciting  force  within  re- 
mains, or  tends  to  remain  the  same  (3227.)  in  quantity,  there' 
is  nothing  to  increase  it.  The  increase  in  length,  therefore,  of 
the  external  circuit,  which  acts  as  a  resisting  medium  upon  the 
internal  action,  will  tend  to  diminish  the  force  of  the  whole 
system.  Such  would  be  the  case  if  a  voltaic  battery  surrounded 
by  distilled  water,  as  the  analogous  illustration  (3276.),  could 
be  elongated  in  the  water,  and  so  its  poles  be  removed  further 
apart;  and  though  in  the  case  of  magnets  previously  charged, 
some  efFect  equivalent  to  intensity  of  excitement  may  be  pro- 
duced by  conjoining  several  together  end  on,  yet  the  diminished 
sustentation  of  power  externally  appears  to  follow  as  a  conse- 
quence of  the  increased  distance  of  the  extreme  poles,  or  external, 
mutually  dependent  parts.  Static  electric  induction  also  supplies 
a  correspondent  and  illustrative  case. 

3289.  The  usual  case  in  which  the  influence  of  length  and 
thickness  becomes  evident,  is  not,  however,  always  or  often  that 
of  the  juxtaposition  of  magnets  already  as  highly  charged  as  they 
can  be,  but  rather  that  of  a  bar  about  to  be  charged.  If  two 
bars,  alike  in  steel,  hardness,  &c.,  one  an  inch  long  and  the  tenth 
of  an  inch  in  diameter,  and  the  other  of  the  same  length  but 
five-tenths  of  an  inch  in  diameter,  be  magnetized  to  supersatu- 
ration,  the  latter,  though  it  contains  twenty-five  times  the  steel 
of  the  former,  will  not  retain  twenty-five  times  the  power,  for 
the  reason  already  given  (3287.) ;  the  surrounding  medium  not 
being  able  to  sustain  external  lines  of  force  to  that  amount.  But 
if  a  third  bar,  two  inches  long  and  also  five-tenths  in  diameter. 


432 


Physical  lines  of  magnetic  force.    [June  1852. 


be  magnetized  at  the  same  time,  it  can  receive  much  more  power 
than  the  second  one.    A  natural  reason  for  this  presents  itself 
by  the  hypothesis ;  for  the  limitation  of  power  in  the  two  cases 
is  not  in  the  magnets  themselves,  but  in  the  external  medium. 
The  shorter  magnet  has  contact  and  connexion  with  that  medium 
by  a  certain  amount  of  surface ;  and  just  what  power  the  medium 
outside  that  surface  can  support,  the  magnet  will  retain.  Make 
the  magnet  as  long  again,  and  there  is  far  more  contact  and  rela- 
tion with  the  surrounding  medium  than  before ;  and  therefore 
the  power  which  the  magnet  can  retain  is  greater.    If  there  were 
such  limited  points  of  resulting  action  in  the  magnet  as  is  often 
understood  by  the  word  poles,  then  such  a  result  could  hardly 
be  the  case,  on  my  view  of  the  physical  actions.    But  such  poles 
do  not  exist.    Every  part  of  the  surface  of  the  magnet,  so  to 
say,  is  pouring  forth  externally  lines  of  magnetic  force,  as  may 
be  seen  in  figs.  2,  3,  4,  5  (3274.).    The  larger  the  magnet,  to  a 
certain  extent,  and  the  larger  the  amount  of  external  conducting 
medium  in  contact  with  it,  the  more  freely  is  this  transmission 
made.    If  the  second  magnet,  being  an  inch  long,  be  conceived 
to  be  charged  to  its  full  amount,  and  then,  whilst  in  free  space, 
could  have  half  an  inch  of  iron  added  to  its  length  at  each  end, 
we  see  and  know  that  many  of  the  hues  of  force  originally  issuing 
from  that  part  of  its  surface  still  left  in  contact  with  the  air  at 
the  equatorial  part,  would  now  move  internally  towards  the  ends, 
and  issue  at  a  part  of  the  soft  iron  surface  ;  indicating  the 
manner  in  which  the  tension  would  be  reheved  by  this  better 
conducting  medium  at  the  ends,  and  by  increased  surface  of 
contact  with  the  surrounding  bad  conductor  of  air  or  space. 
The  thick,  short  magnet  could  evidently  excite  and  carry  on 
physical  lines  of  magnetic  power  far  more  numerous  than  those 
which  the  space  about  it  can  receive  and  convey  from  pole  to 
pole ;  and  the  increase  in  the  length  of  the  magnet  may  go  on 
advantageously,  until  the  increasing  sum  of  power,  sustainable 
by  the  increasing  medium  in  the  circuit,  is  equal  to  that  which 
the  magnet  can  sustain  or  transmit  internally;  for  all  the  Hues 
of  power,  wherever  they  issue  from  the  magnet,  have  to  pass 
through  its  equator;  and  in  this  way  the  equator  or  thickness 
of  the  magnet  becomes  related  to  its  length.    So  the  advan- 
tageous increase  in  length  of  the  bar  is  limited  by  the  increasing 
resistance  within,  and  especially  at  the  equator  of  the  bar;  and 


June  1852.]        Size  mid  shape  of  magnets. 


433 


the  increase  in  breadth,  by  the  increasing  resistance  (for  in- 
creasing powers)  of  the  external  surrounding  medium  (3287.)- 

3290.  It  is  very  interesting  to  observe  the  results  obtained 
when  an  attempt  is  made  to  magnetize,  regularly,  a  thin  steel 
wire,  about  15  or  20  inches  in  length,  and  0-05  of  an  inch  in 
diameter.  It  can  hardly  be  effected  by  bars ;  and  when  the  wire 
is  afterwards  examined  by  filings  (3234.),  it  is  found  to  have 
irregular  and  consecutive  poles,  which  vary  as  the  magnetization 
is  repeated  with  the  same  wire,  as  if  they  broke  out  suddenly  by 
a  rupture  of  something  like  unstable  equilibrium ;  the  effects 
apparently  being  chiefly  referable  to  the  cause  now  assigned. 
Again,  when  a  magnet  is  made  out  of  a  thin,  hard,  steel  plate, 
whose  length  is  ten  or  twelve  times  its  width,  it  is  well  known 
how  the  lines  of  force  issue  from  it  in  greatest  abundance  at  the 
extreme  angles,  and  then  at  the  edges ;  and  how  a  spot  on  the 
face  gives  exit  to  a  much  smaller  number  of  lines  than  a  like  spot 
on  the  edge,  at  the  same  distance  from  the  magnetic  equator. 
Iron  filings  show  such  results  readily,  and  so  also  do  the  vibra- 
tions of  a  magnetic  needle,  and  likewise  the  revolutions  of  a  wire 
ring  (3212.).  Now  this  state  of  the  plate-magnet  is  precisely 
that  which  would  be  expected  from  the  hypotheses  of  the  neces- 
sary and  dependent  state  of  the  magnet  on  the  medium  sur- 
rounding it. 

3291.  The  mutual  dependence  of  a  magnet  and  the  external 
medium,  assumed  in  the  view  now  put  forth,  bears  upon,  and 
may  probably  explain,  numerous  observations  of  the  apparently 
superficial  character  of  the  magnetism  of  iron  and  magnets  in 
different  cases.  If  a  hard  steel  bar  be  magnetized  by  touch  of 
other  magnets,  both  the  vicinity  of  the  superficial  parts  of  the 
bar  to  the  exciting  magnet  iu  the  first  instance,  and  afterwards 
to  the  surrounding  sustaining  medium,  will  tend  to  cause  the 
magnetism  to  be  superficial  in  the  bar.  If  a  small  magnet  or 
a  horseshoe  bar  be  surrounded  by  a  thick  shell  of  iron  as  its  ex- 
ternal medium,  the  inner  surface  of  the  iron,  or  that  nearest  to  the 
magnet,  with  its  neighbouring  parts,  will  convey  on  more  power 
than  the  parts  further  away.  If  a  thick  iron  core  be  placed  in  a 
helix  carrying  a  feeble  or  moderate  electric  current,  it  is  the  part 
of  the  core  nearest  to  the  helix  which  becomes  most  highly 
charged.  Probably  many  other  like  results  may  appear,  or  be 
hereafter  devised,  and  may  greatly  help  to  assist  the  discus- 

VOL.  III.  2  F 


434  Physical  lines  of  magnetic  force.     [June  1852. 

sion  of  the  question  of  physical  lines  of  force  now  under  con- 
sideration. 

3292.  When,  in  place  of  considering  the  medium  external  to 
a  magnet  as  homogeneous  or  equal  in  magnetic  power,  we  make 
it  variable  in  different  parts,  then  the  effects  in  it  appear  to  me 
still  to  be  in  perfect  accordance  with  the  notion  of  physical  lines 
of  magnetic  force,  which,  being  present  externally,  are  definite  m 
direction  and  amount.  The  series  of  substances  at  our  command 
which  affect  the  surrounding  space  in  this  respect,  do  not  present 
a  great  choice  of  successive  steps;  but  having  iron,  nickel  and 
cobalt,  very  high  as  paramagnetic  bodies,  we  then  possess  hard 
steel,  as  very  far  beneath  them;  next,  perhaps,  oxides  of  iron, 
and  so  on  by  solutions  of  the  magnetic  metals  to  oxygen,  water, 
glass,  bismuth  and  phosphorus,  in  the  diamagnetic  direction. 
Taking  the  magnetic  force  of  the  earth  as  supplying  the  source 
of  power,  and  placing  a  globe  of  iron  or  nickel  in  the  air,  we  see 
by  the  pointing  of  a  small  magnetic  needle  (or  in  another  case, 
by  the  use  of  iron  fihngs  (3240.)),  the  deflected  course  of  the 
lines  of  force  as  they  enter  into  and  pass  out  of  the  sphere,  con- 
sequent upon  the  conducting  power  of  the  paramagnetic  body. 
These  have  been  described  in  their  forms  in  another  place  (3238.). 
If  we  take  a  large  bar-magnet,  and  place  a  piece  of  soft  iron, 
about  half  the  width  of  the  magnet,  and  three  or  four  times  as 
long  as  it  is  wide,  end  on  to,  and  about  its  own  width  from  one 
pole,  and  covering  that  with  paper,  then  observe  the  forms  ot 
the  lines  of  force  by  iron  filings ;  it  will  be  seen  how  beautifully 
those  issuing  from  the  magnet  converge,  by  fine  mflections  on 
to  the  iron,  entering  by  a  comparatively  small  surface,  and  how 
they  pass  out  in  far  more  diffuse  streams  by  a  much  larger  sur- 
face at  the  further  part  of  the  bar,  fig.  7-    If  we  take  several 
pieces  of  iron,  cubes  for  instance,  then  the  lines  of  force  which 
are  altogether  outside  of  them,  may  be  seen  undergoing  success- 
ive undulations  in  contrary  directions,  fig.  8.    Yet  m  all  hese 
cases  of  the  globe,  bar  and  cubes,  I,  at  least,  am  satistied  that  a 
section  across  the  same  lines  of  force  in  any  part  of  their  course 
however  or  whichever  way  deflected,  would  yield  the  same  amount 
of  effect  (3109.  3218.) ;  at  the  same  time  this  effect  of  deflection 
is  not  only  consistent  with,  but  absolutely  suggests  the  idea  of  a 

physical  line  of  force.  . 

3293.  Then  the  manner  in  which  the  power  disappears  in  such 


June  1852.]       Media  surrounding  a  magnet. 


435 


cases  to  an  ordinary  magnetic  needle  is  perfectly  consistent.  A 
little  needle  held  by  the  side  of  the  soft  bar  described  above 
(3292.),  indicates  much  less  magnetic  power  than  if  the  iron 
were  away.  If  held  in  a  hole  made  in  the  iron,  it  is  almost  in- 
different to  the  magnet ;  yet  what  power  remains  shows  that 
the  lines  through  the  air  in  the  hole  are  in  the  same  general  di- 
rection as  those  through  the  neighbouring  iron.  These  effects 
are  perfectly  well  known,  no  doubt ;  and  my  object  is  only  to 
show  that  they  are  consistent  with,  and  support  the  idea  of  ex- 
ternal media  having  magnetic  conducting  power.  But  these 
apparent  destructions  of  power,  and  even  far  more  anomalous 
cases  (2868.  3155.),  are  fully  accounted  for  by  the  hypothesis; 
and  the  force  absolutely  unaffected  in  amount  is  found,  experi- 
mentally, by  the  moving  wire.  I  have  had  occasion  before  to 
refer  to  the  modification  of  the  magnetic  force  (in  relation  to  the 
magnetic  needle),  where,  its  absolute  quantity  being  the  same, 
it  passes  across  better  or  worse  conductors,  and  I  have  tempo- 
rarily used  the  words  quantity  and  intensity/  (2866.  2868.  2870.). 
I  would,  however,  rather  not  attempt  to  limit  or  define  these  or 
such  like  terms  now,  however  much  they  may  be  wanted,  but 
wait  until  what  is  at  present  little  more  than  suggestion,  may 
have  been  canvassed,  and  if  true  in  itself,  may  have  received 
assurance  from  the  opinions  or  testimony  of  others. 

3294.  The  association  of  magnet  with  magnet,  and  all  the 
effects  then  produced  (3218.),  are  in  harmony,  as  far  as  I  can 
perceive,  with  the  idea  of  a  physical  line  of  magnetic  force.  If 
the  magnets  are  all  free  to  move,  they  set  to  each  other,  and  then 
tend  to  approach  ;  the  great  result  being,  that  the  lines  from  all 
the  sources  tend  to  coalesce,  to  pass  through  the  best  conductors, 
and  to  contract  in  length.  When  there  are  several  magnets  in 
presence  and  in  restrained  conditions,  the  Hues  of  force,  which 
they  present  by  filings,  are  most  varied  and  beautiful  (3238.) ; 
but  all  are  easily  read  and  understood  by  the  principles  I  have 
set  forth.  As  the  power  is  definite  in  amount,  its  removability 
from  place  to  place,  according  to  the  changing  disposition  of 
the  magnets,  or  the  introduction  of  better  or  vi^orse  conductors 
into  the  surrounding  media,  becomes  a  perfectly  simple  result. 

3295.  As  magnets  may  be  looked  upon  as  the  habitations  of 
bundles  of  lines  of  force,  they  probably  show  us  the  tendencies 
of  the  physical  lines  of  force  where  they  occur  in  the  space 

2  P  2 


436 


Physical  lines  of  magnetic  force.    [June  1852. 


around ;  just  as  electric  currents,  when  conducted  by  solid  wires, 
or  M'hen  passing,  as  the  Leyden  or  the  voltaic  spark,  through 
air  or  a  vacuum,  are  alike  in  their  essential  relations.  In  that 
case,  the  repulsion  of  magnets  when  placed  side  by  side,  indi- 
cates the  lateral  tendency  of  separation  of  lines  of  magnetic  force 
(3267.).  The  effect,  however,  must  be  considered  in  relation  to 
the  simultaneous  gathering  up  of  the  terrestrial  lines  of  force  in 
the  surrounding  space  upon  each  magnet,  and  also  the  tendency 
of  each  magnet  to  secure  its  own  independent  external  medium. 
The  effect  coincides  with,  and  passe's  into  that  of  the  lateral  re- 
pulsion of  balls  of  iron  in  a  previously  equal  magnetic  field  (2814.) ; 
which  again,  by  a  consideration  of  the  action  in  two  directions, 
i.  e.  parallel  to  and  across  the  magnetic  axis,  links  the  phasno- 
mena  of  separation  with  those  of  attraction. 

3296.  When  speaking  of  magnets,  in  illustration  of  the  ques- 
tion under  consideration,  I  mean  magnets  perfect  in  their  kind, 
i.  e.  such  as  are  very  hard  and  hold  their  charge,  so  that  there 
shall  be  neither  internal  reaction  of  discharge  or  development 
(3224.),  nor  any  external  change,  except  what  may  depend  upon 
such  absolute  and  permanent  loss  of  exciting  power  as  is  conse- 
quent upon  an  over-ruling  change  of  the  external  relations. 
Heterogeneous  magnets,  which  might  allow  of  irregular  varia- 
tions of  power,  are  out  of  present  consideration. 

3297.  With  regard  to  the  great  point  under  consideration,  it 
is  simply,  whether  the  lines  of  magnetic  force  have  a  physical 
existence  or  not  ?  Such  a  point  may  be  investigated,  perhaps 
even  satisfactorily,  without  our  being  able  to  go  into  the  further 
questions  of  how  they  account  for  magnetic  attraction  and  repul- 
sion, or  even  by  what  condition  of  space,  jether  or  matter,  these 
lines  consist.  If  the  extremities  of  a  straight  bar-magnet,  or  if 
the  polarities  of  a  circular  plate  of  steel  (3274.),  are  in  magnetic 
relation  to  each  other  externally  (325 70?  then  I  think  the  exist- 
ence of  curved  lines  of  magnetic  force  must  be  conceded  (3258. 
3263.)^  and  if  that  be  granted,  then  I  think  that  the  physical 
nature  of  the  lines  must  be  granted  also.  If  the  external  rela- 
tion of  the  poles  or  polarity  is  denied,  then,  as  it  appears  to  me, 
the  internal  relation  must  be  denied  also ;  and  with  it  a  vast 
number  of  old  and  new  facts  (3070.  &c.)  will  be  left  without 

1  See  for  a  case  of  curved  lines  the  inclosed  and  compressed  system  of 
forces  belonging  to  the  central  circular  magnet,  fig.  6  (3275.). 


June  1852.]   Magnetic  attraction  and  repulsion.  437 

either  theory,  hypothesis,  or  even  a  vague  supposition  to  explain 
them. 

3298.  Perhaps  both  magnetic  attraction  and  repulsion,  in  all 
forms  and  cases,  resolve  themselves  into  the  differential  action 
(2757.)  of  the  magnets  and  substances  which  occupy  space,  and 
modify  its  magnetic  power.  A  magnet  first  originates  lines  of 
magnetic  force;  and  then,  if  present  with  another  magnet,  offers  in 
one  position  a  very  free  conduction  of  the  new  lines,  like  a  para- 
magnetic body ;  or  if  restrained  in  the  conti-ary  position,  resists 
their  passage,  and  resembles  a  highly  diamagnetic  substance.  So, 
then,  a  source  of  magnetic  lines  being  present,  and  also  magnets  or 
other  bodies  affecting  and  varying  the  conducting  power  of  space, 
those  bodies  which  can  convey  onwards  the  most  force,  may  tend, 
by  differential  actions,  with  the  others  present,  to  take  up  the 
position  in  which  they  can  do  so  the  most  freely,  whether  it  is 
by  pointing  or  by  approximation ;  the  best  conductor  passing  to 
the  place  of  strongest  action  (2757O3  whilst  the  worst  retreats 
from  it,  and  so  the  effects  both  of  attraction  and  repulsion  be 
produced.  The  tendency  of  the  lines  of  magnetic  force  to  shorten 
(3266.  3280.)  would  be  consistent  with  such  a  notion.  The 
result  would  occur  whether  the  physical  lines  of  force  were  sup- 
posed to  consist  in  a  dynamic  or  a  static  state  (3269.). 

3299.  Having  applied  the  term  line  of  magnetic  force  to  an 
abstract  idea,  which  I  believe  represents  accurately  the  nature, 
condition,  direction,  and  comparative  amount  of  the  magnetic 
forces,  without  reference  to  any  physical  condition  of  the  force, 
I  have  now  applied  the  term  physical  line  of  force  to  include  the 
further  idea  of  their  physical  nature.  The  first  set  of  lines  I 
affirm  upon  the  evidence  of  strict  experiment  (307l.  &c.).  The 
second  set  of  lines  I  advocate,  chiefly  with  a  view  of  stating  the 
question  of  their  existence ;  and  though  I  should  not  have  raised 
the  argument  unless  I  had  thought  it  both  important,  and  likely 
to  be  answered  ultimately  in  the  affirmative,  I  still  hold  the 
opinion  with  some  hesitation,  with  as  much,  indeed,  as  accom- 
panies any  conclusion  I  endeavour  to  draw  respecting  points  in 
the  very  depths  of  science,  as,  for  instance,  regarding  one,  two, 
or  no  electric  fluids ;  or  the  real  nature  of  a  ray  of  light,  or  the 
nature  of  attraction,  even  that  of  gravity  itself,  or  the  general 
nature  of  matter. 

Royal  Institution,  March  6,  1852. 


438 


On  the  Physical  Lines  of  Magnetic  Force. 

[Royal  Institution  Proceedings,  June  11,  1852.] 

On  a  former  occasion  ^  certain  lines  about  a  bar-magnet  w  ere 
described  and  defined  (being  those  which  are  depicted  to  the  eye 
by  the  use  of  iron  filings  sprinkled  in  the  neighbourhood  of 
the  magnet),  and  were  i-ecommended  as  expressing  accurately 
the  nature,  condition,  direction,  and  amount  of  the  force  in  any 
given  region  either  within  or  outside  of  the  bar.    At  that  time 
the  lines  were  considered  in  the  abstract.    Without  departing 
from  or  unsettling  anything  then  said,  the  inquiry  is  now  entered 
upon  of  the  possible  and  probable ^%5icaZ  existence  of  such  Hues. 
Those  who  wish  to  reconsider  the  different  points  belonging  to 
these  parts  of  magnetic  science  may  refer  to  two  papers  in  the 
first  part  of  the  Phil.  Trans,  for  1852  2  for  data  concerning  the 
representative  lines  of  force,  and  to  a  paper  in  the  Phil.  Mag. 
4th  Series,  1852,  vol.  iii.  p.  401,  for  the  argument  respecting  the 
physical  lines  of  force  ^. 

Many  powers  act  manifestly  at  a  distance;  their  physical 
nature  is  incomprehensible  to  us :  still  we  may  learn  much  that 
is  real  and  positive  about  them,  and  amongst  other  things  some- 
thing of  the  condition  of  the  space  between  the  body  acting  and 
that  acted  upon,  or  between  the  two  mutually  acting  bodies. 
Such  powers  are  presented  to  us  by  the  phaenomena  of  gravity, 
light,  electricity,  magnetism,  &c.  These  when  examined  will  be 
found  to  present  remarkable  differences  in  relation  to  their 
respective  lines  of  forces  ;  and  at  the  same  time  that  they  esta- 
blish the  existence  of  real  physical  lines  in  some  cases,  will  facili- 
tate the  consideration  of  the  question  as  applied  especially  to 
magnetism. 

When  two  bodies,  a,  b,  gravitate  towards  each  other,  the  fine 
in  which  they  act  is  a  straight  line,  for  such  is  the  hue  which 
either  would  follow  if  free  to  move.  The  attractive  force  is  not 
altered,  either  in  direction  or  amount,  if  a  third  body  is  made  to 
act  by  gravitation  or  otherwise  upon  either  or  both  of  the  two 
first.  A  balanced  cylinder  of  brass  gravitates  to  the  earth  with 
a  weight  exactly  the  same,  whether  it  is  left  like  a  pendulum 
freely  to  hang  towards  it,  or  whether  it  is  drawn  aside  by  other 

>  See  page  402.  '  See  page  328.  See  page  407. 


June  1852.]      Physical  lines  of  force— light.  .  439 

attractions  or  by  tension,  whatever  the  amount  of  the  latter  may 
be.  A  new  gravitating  force  may  be  exerted  upon  a,  but  that 
does  not  in  the  least  affect  the  amount  of  power  which  it  exerts 
towards  b.  We  have  no  evidence  that  time  enters  in  any  way 
into  the  exercise  of  this  power,  whatever  the  distance  between 
the  acting  bodies,  as  that  from  the  sun  to  the  earth,  or  from  star 
to  star.  We  can  hardly  conceive  of  this  force  in  one  particle 
by  itself;  it  is  when  two  or  more  are  present  that  we  comprehend 
it:  yet  in  gaining  this  idea  we  perceive  no  difference  in  the 
character  of  the  power  in  the  different  particles  ;  all  of  the  same 
kind  are  equal,  mutual,  and  alike.  In  the  case  of  gravitation,  no 
effect  which  sustains  the  idea  of  an  independent  or  physical  hne 
of  force  is  presented  to  us  ;  and  as  far  as  we  at  present  know,  the 
line  of  gravitation  is  merely  an  ideal  Hne  representing  the  direc- 
tion in  which  the  power  is  exerted. 

Take  the  Sun  in  relation  to  another  force  which  it  exerts  upon 
the  earth,  namely  its  illuminating  or  warming  power.  In  this 
case  rays  (which  are  lines  of  force)  pass  across  the  intermediate 
space ;  but  then  we  may  affect  these  lines  by  different  media 
applied  to  them  in  their  course.  We  may  alter  their  direction 
either  by  reflection  or  refraction ;  we  may  make  them  pursue 
curved  or  angular  courses.  We  may  cut  them  off  at  their  origin 
and  then  search  for  and  find  them  before  they  have  attained 
their  object.  They  have  a  relation  to  time,  and  occupy  8  minutes 
in  coming  from  the  sun  to  the  earth  :  so  that  they  may  exist 
independently  either  of  their  source  or  their  final  home,  and 
have  in  fact  a  clear  distinct  physical  existence.  They  are  in 
extreme  contrast  with  the  lines  of  gravitating  power  in  this 
respect;  as  they  are  also  in  respect  of  their  condition  at  their 
terminations.  The  two  bodies  terminating  a  line  of  gravitating 
force  are  alike  in  their  actions  in  every  respect,  and  so  the  line 
joining  them  has  like  relations  in  both  directions.  The  two 
bodies  at  the  terminals  of  a  ray  are  utterly  unlike  in  action ;  one 
is  a  source,  the  other  a  destroyer  of  the  line ;  and  the  line  itself 
has  the  relation  of  a  stream  flowing  in  one  direction.  In  these 
two  cases  of  gravity  and  radiation,  the  difference  between  an 
abstract  and  a  physical  line  of  force  is  immediately  manifest. 

Turning  to  the  case  of  Static  Electricity  we  find  here  attrac- 
tions (and  other  actions)  at  a  distance  as  in  the  former  cases  ; 
but  when  we  come  to  compare  the  attraction  with  that  of  gravity, 


440  Physical  lines  of  electric  force  ; —    [June  1R52. 

very  striking  distinctions  are  presented  which  immediately  affect 
the  question  of  a  physical  line  of  force.    In  the  first  place,  when 
we  examine  the  bodies  bounding  or  terminating  the  lines  of 
attraction,  we  find  them  as  before,  mutually  and  equally  con- 
cerned in  the  action  ;  but  they  are  not  alike :  on  the  contrary, 
though  each  is  endued  with  a  force  which  speaking  generally  is 
of  the  like  nature,  still  they  are  in  such  contrast  that  their  actions 
on  a  third  body  in  a  state  like  either  of  them  are  precisely  the 
reverse  of  each  other,— what  the  one  attracts  the  other  repels ; 
and  the  force  makes  itself  evident  as  one  of  those  manifestations 
of  power  endued  with  a  dual  and  antithetical  condition.  Now 
with  all  such  dual  powers,  attraction  cannot  occur  unless  the 
two  conditions  of  force  are  present  and  in  face  of  each  other 
through  the  lines  of  force.    Another  essential  limitation  is  that 
these  two  conditions  must  be  exactly  equal  in  amount,  not  merely 
to  produce  the  effects  of  attraction,  but  in  every  other  case ;  for 
it  is  impossible  so  to  arrange  things  that  there  shall  be  present 
or  be  evolved  more  electric  power  of  the  one  kind  than  of  the 
other.    Another  limitation  is  that  they  must  be  in  physical  rela- 
tion to  each  other;  and  that  when  a  positive  and  a  negative 
electrified  surface  are  thus  associated,  we  cannot  cut  off  this 
relation  except  by  transferring  the  forces  of  these  surfaces  to 
equal  amounts  of  the  contrary  forces  provided  elsewhere.  An- 
other limitation  ia  that  the  power  is  definite  in  amount.    If  a 
ball  a  be  charged  with  10  of  positive  electricity,  it  may  be  made 
to  act  with  that  amount  of  power  on  another  ball  b  charged  with 
10  of  negative  electricity  ;  but  if  5  of  its  power  be  taken  up  by 
a  third  ball  c  charged  with  negative  electricity,  then  it  can  only 
act  with  5  of  power  on  ball  a,  and  that  ball  must  find  or  evolve 
5  of  positive  power  elsewhere  :  this  is  quite  unlike  what  occurs 
with  gravity,  a  power  that  presents  us  with  nothing  dual  m 
its  character.    Finally,  the  electric  force  acts  in  curved  Imes. 
If  a  ball  be  electrified  positively  and  insulated  in  the  an-,  and  a 
round  metallic  plate  be  placed  about  12  or  15  inches  off,  facmg 
it  and  uninsulated,  the  latter  will  be  found,  by  the  necessity 
mentioned  above,  in  a  negative  condition ;  but  it  is  not  negative 
only  on  the  side  facing  the  ball,  but  on  the  other  or  outer  face 
also,  as  may  be  shown  by  a  carrier  apphed  there,  or  by  a  stnp 
of  gold  or  silver  leaf  hung  against  that  outer  face.    Now  the 
power  affecting  this  face  does  not  pass  through  the  uninsulated 


June  1852.]     of  static  and  dynamic  electricity.  441 

plate,  for  the  thinnest  gold  leaf  is  able  to  stop  the  inductive 
action,  but  round  the  edges  of  the  face,  and  therefore  acts  in 
curved  lines.  Ail  these  points  indicate  the  existence  of  physical 
lines  of  electric  force :— the  absolutely  essential  relation  of 
positive  and  negative  surfaces  to  each  other,  and  their  depen- 
dence on  each  other  contrasted  with  the  known  mobility  of  the 
forces,  admit  of  no  other  conclusion.  The  action  also  in  curved 
lines  must  depend  upon  a  physical  line  of  force.  And  there  is 
a  third  important  character  of  the  force  leading  to  the  same 
result,  namely  its  affection  by  media  having  different  specific 
inductive  capacities. 

When  we  pass  to  Dynamic  Electricity  the  evidence  of  physical 
lines  of  force  is  far  more  patent.  A  voltaic  battery  having  its 
extremities  connected  by  a  conducting  medium,  has  what  has 
been  expressively  called  a  current  of  force  running  round  the 
circuit,  but  this  current  is  an  axis  of  power  having  equal  and 
contrary  forces  in  opposite  directions.  It  consists  of  hnes  of 
force  which  are  compressed  or  expanded  according  to  the  trans- 
verse action  of  the  conductor,  which  changes  in  direction  with 
the  form  of  the  conductor,  which  are  found  in  every  part  of  the 
conductor,  and  can  be  taken  out  from  any  place  by  channels 
properly  appointed  for  the  purpose ;  and  nobody  doubts  that 
they  are  physical  lines  of  force. 

Finally  as  regards  a  Magnet,  which  is  the  object  of  the  present 
discourse.    A  magnet  presents  a  system  of  forces  perfect  in  itself, 
and  able,  therefore,  to  exist  by  its  own  mutual  relations.   It  has 
the  dual  and  antithetic  character  belonging  to  both  static  and 
dynamic  electricity ;  and  this  is  made  manifest  by  what  are 
called  its  polarities,  i.  e.  by  the  opposite  powers  of  like  kind 
found  at  and  towards  its  extremities.    These  powers  are  found 
to  be  absolutely  equal  to  each  other ;  one  cannot  be  changed  in 
any  degree  as  to  amount  without  an  equal  change  of  the  other ; 
and  this  is  true  when  the  opposite  polarities  of  a  magnet  are  not 
related  to  each  other,  but  to  the  polarities  of  other  magnets. 
The  polarities,  or  the  northness  and  southness  of  a  magnet  are 
not  only  related  to  each  other,  through  or  within  the  magnet 
itself,  but  they  are  also  related  externally  to  opposite  polarities 
(in  the  manner  of  static  electric  induction),  or  they  cannot  exist ; 
and  this  external  relation  involves  and  necessitates  an  exactly 
equal  amount  of  the  new  opposite  polarities  to  which  those  of 


442  Physical  lines  of  magnelic  force.     [June  1852. 

the  magnet  are  related.  So  that  if  the  force  of  a  magnet  a  is 
related  to  that  of  another  magnet  b,  it  cannot  act  on  a  third 
magnet  c  without  being  taken  off  from  b,  to  an  amount  propor- 
tional to  its  action  on  c.  The  lines  of  magnetic  force  are  shown 
by  the  moving  wire  to  exist  both  within  and  outside  of  the 
magnet ;  also  they  are  shown  to  be  closed  curves  passing  in  one 
part  of  their  course  through  the  magnet ;  and  the  amount  of  those 
within  the  magnet  at  its  equator  is  exactly  equal  in  force  to  the 
amount  in  any  section  including  the  whole  of  those  on  the  out-^ 
side.  The  lines  of  force  outside  a  magnet  can  be  affected  in 
their  direction  by  the  use  of  various  media  placed  in  their  course. 
A  magnet  can  in  no  M^ay  be  procured  having  only  one  magnetism, 
or  even  the  smallest  excess  of  northness  or  southness  one  over 
the  other.  When  the  polarities  of  a  magnet  are  not  related 
externally  to  the  forces  of  other  magnets,  then  they  are  related 
to  each  other  :  i.  e.  the  northness  and  southness  of  an  isolated 
magnet  are  externally  dependent  on  and  sustained  by  each  other.^ 

Now  all  these  facts,  and  many  more,  point  to  the  existence  of 
physical  lines  of  force  external  to  the  magnets  as  well  as  within. 
They  exist  in  curved  as  well  as  in  straight  lines ;  for  if  we  con- 
ceive of  an  isolated  straight  bar-magnet,  or  more  especially  of  a 
round  disc  of  steel  magnetized  regularly,  so  that  its  magnetic 
axis  shall  be  in  one  diameter,  it  is  evident  that  the  polarities 
must  be  related  to  each  other  externally  by  curved  hues  of  force ; 
for  no  straight  line  can  at  the  same  time  touch  two  points  having 
northness  and  southness.  Curved  lines  of  force  can,  as  I  think, 
only  consist  with  physical  lines  of  force. 

The  phcenomena  exhibited  by  the  moving  wire  confirm  the 
same  conclusion.  As  the  wire  moves  across  the  lines  of  force,  a 
current  of  electricity  passes  or  tends  to  pass  through  it,  there 
being  no  such  current  before  the  wire  is  moved.  The  wire  when 
quiescent  has  no  such  current,  and  when  it  moves  it  need  not 
pass  into  places  where  the  magnetic  force  is  greater  or  less.  It 
may  travel  in  such  a  course  that  if  a  magnetic  needle  were  carried 
through  the  same  course  it  would  be  entirely  unaffected  mag- 
netically, i.  e.  it  would  be  a  matter  of  absolute  indifference  to  the 
needle  whether  it  were  moving  or  still.  Matters  may  be  so 
arranged  that  the  wire  when  still  shall  have  the  same  diamagnetic 
force  as  the  medium  surrounding  the  magnet,  and  so  ^^Jiojn^' 
cause  disturbance  of  the  lines  of  force  passing  through  both ; 


June  1852.]        Medium  in  tvhich  they  exist.  443 

and  yet  when  the  wive  moves,  a  current  of  electricity  shall  be 
generated  in  it.  The  mere  fact  of  motion  cannot  have  produced 
this  current :  there  must  have  been  a  state  or  condition  around 
the  magnet  and  sustained  by  it,  within  the  range  of  which  the 
w  ire  was  placed ;  and  this  state  shows  the  physical  constitution 
of  tlie  lines  of  magnetic  force. 

What  this  state  is,  or  upon  what  it  depends,  cannot  as  yet  be 
declared.  It  may  depend  upon  the  aether,  as  a  ray  of  hght  does, 
and  an  association  has  already  been  shown  between  light  and 
magnetism.  It  may  depend  upon  a  state  of  tension,  or  a  state  of 
vibration,  or  perhaps  some  other  state  analogous  to  the  electric 
current,  to  which  the  magnetic  forces  are  so  intimately  related. 
Whether  it  of  necessity  requires  matter  for  its  sustentation  will 
depend  upon  what  is  understood  by  the  term  matter.  If  that  is 
to  be  confined  to  ponderable  or  gravitating  substances,  then 
matter  is  not  essential  to  the  physical  lines  of  magnetic  force  any 
more  than  to  a  ray  of  light  or  heat;  but  if  in  the  assumption  of 
an  Eether  we  admit  it  to  be  a  species  of  matter,  then  the  lines  of 
force  may  depend  upon  some  function  of  it.  Experimentally 
mere  space  is  magnetic;  but  then  the  idea  of  such  mere  space 
must  include  that  of  the  aether,  when  one  is  talking  on  that  belief; 
or  if  hereafter  any  other  conception  of  the  state  or  condition  of 
space  rise  up,  it  must  be  admitted  into  the  view  of  that,  which 
just  now  in  relation  to  experiment  is  called  mere  space.  On 
the  other  hand  it  is,  I  think,  an  ascertained  fact,  that  ponderable 
matter  is.  not  essential  to  the  existence  of  physical  lines  of  mag- 
netic force. 


444 


On  the  Magnetic  Relations  and  Characters  of  the  Metals  K 

In  two  former  communications  to  the  Philosophical  Magazine^ 
respecting  the  magnetic  characters  of  metals  generally  and  the 
temperatm-es  at  which  they  respectively  lost  or  gained  the 
powers  of  magnetic  induction,  I  said  that  iron  and  nickel  were 
the  only  metals  which  had  this  power,  and  that  I  could  not  find 
it  in  pure  cobalt.  In  this  I  was  in  error ;  cobalt  has  this  pro- 
perty in  common  with  iron  and  nickel,  as  others  have  said.  I 
have  sought  for  the  piece  of  cobalt  on  which  I  experimented 
and  believed  to  be  pure,  but  cannot  find  it,  and  am  now  unable 
to  ascertain  the  cause  of  my  error,  though  not  too  late  to 
correct  it. 

By  favour  of  Dr.  Percy  and  Mr.  Askin  I  have  recently  ex- 
perimented with  two  fine  pieces  of  pure  cobalt  prepared  by  the 
latter,  both  being  well-fused  and  perfectly  clean  masses.  This 
metal  becomes  strongly  magnetic  by  induction,  either  of  a  mag- 
net or  an  electro-current,  and  can  easily  be  made  to  lift  more 
than  its  own  weight.  Like  soft  iron  and  nickel,  it  does  not 
retain  its  magnetism  when  the  inducing  influence  is  removed. 

It  was  to  me  a  point  of  great  interest  to  ascertain  whether, 
and  at  what  temperature,  cobalt  would  lose  this  power  and  be- 
come as  the  unmagnetic  metals.  To  my  surprise  I  found  this 
to  be  very  high,  not  merely  much  higher  than  with  nickel,  but 
far  above  that  required  for  iron  or  steel,  and  nearly  approaching 
the  temperature  of  melted  copper.  That  for  iron  is  a  moderate 
red  heat,  and  that  for  nickel  the  temperature  of  boiling  oil  only. 
As  the  temperature  rises,  the  magnetic  force  of  the  cobalt  con- 
tinues, apparently  undiminished,  to  a  certain  degree  of  heat,  and 
then  suddenly  ceases  ;  and  it  comes  on  as  suddenly  in  descending 
from  still  higher  temperatures. 

The  oxide  of  cobalt  procured  by  burning  the  metal  cobalt  on 
charcoal  by  a  jet  of  oxygen  w^as  obtained  as  a  fused  globule  and 
was  not  magnetic. 

The  oxide  of  nickel  being  heated  and  cooled  is  not  magnetic, 
but  whilst  heating  care  must  be  taken  that  it  is  not  reduced.  If 
heated  in  the  flame  of  a  spirit-lamp,  especially  at  the  lower  part, 

1  Philosophical  Magazine,  July  1845. 

2  1836,  vol.  viii.  p.  177,  and  1839.  vol.  xiv.  p.  I6l  ;  or  Exp.  Res.  vol.  ii.  pp. 
217,223. 


J  u  N  E  1 845 .]   Magnetic  relations  of  cooled  metals.  445 

it  will  often  appear  to  be  not  magnetic,  and  then  as  the  tempera- 
ture falls  will  become  magnetic ;  but  this  is  caused  by  the  reduc 
tion  of  a  little  of  the  oxide  at  the  edges  or  elsewhere  m  the  mass 
to  the  metallic  state,  and  its  exhibition  of  the  properties  ot  the 
metal  at  temperatures  above  and  below  the  magnetic  point. 

Manganese.— K  piece  of  manganese  prepared  by  Mr.  Thomson 
and  considered  pure  was  put  into  my  hands.  It  contained  a 
trace  of  iron;  it  was  very  slightly  magnetic,  and  probably  only 
in  consequence  of  the  little  iron  present.  Before  a  jet  of  oxygen 
or  charcoal,  it  burnt  with  sparkles  somewhat  in  the  manner  ot 
iron,  and  produced  an  oxide  which  could  be  obtained  either  as  a 
porous  white  mass  or  as  a  dense  compact  brown  mass,  trans- 
lucent in  small  slices ;  but  in  neither  state  was  the  oxide  mag- 
netic. 

I  then  cooled^  manganese,  chromium,  and  many  other  metals 
and  bodies  to  the  lowest  temperature  which  I  could  obtain^by  a 
mixture  of  aether  and  sohd  carbonic  acid  placed  in  vacuo%  the 
temperature  being  then  not  higher  than  156^  F.  below  0°,  but 
not  one  of  them  assumed  the  magnetic  state.  The  following  is 
a  hst  of  the  substances  : — 


Platinum. 
Gold. 
Silver. 
Palladium. 
Copper. 
Tin. 
Lead. 
Cadmium. 
Zinc. 
Rhodium. 
Manganese. 
Chromium. 
Titanium. 

Iridium  and  Osmium. 
Antimony. 
Arsenic. 
Bismuth. 
Fusible  metal. 

'  Philosophical  Magazine,  1839,  vol.  xiv.  P-  162;  or  Exp.  Res.  vol.  ii.  p.  224. 
2  Philosophical  Transactions,  1845,  pp.  157,  158. 


Speculum  metal. 
Plumbago. 
Gas-retort  carbon. 
Kish. 
Orpiment. 
Realgar. 

Sulphuret  of  antimony. 

bismuth, 
copper. 
...  iron. 

lead, 
silver, 
tin. 

Carbonate  of  iron  (native). 
Prussian  blue. 

Crystallized  sulphate  of  iron. 
Calomel. 

Chloride  of  silver. 


446 


Magnetic  relations  of  cooled  metals.   [June  1845. 


Chloride  of  lead.  Oxide  of  bismuth. 

Protoxide  of  arsenic.  ...      tin  (native). 

antimony.  ...      manganese  (native), 

lead. 

Thus  it  appears  that  only  iron,  nickel  and  cobalt  are  mag- 
netic, or  can  be  made  magnetic  amongst  metals  after  the  manner 
of  iron  ;  but  the  addition  of  cobalt,  and  still  more,  the  very  high 
temperature  required  to  take  away  this  property  from  it,  in- 
creases the  probability '  that  all  the  metals  form  a  common  class 
in  respect  of  this  property ;  and  that  it  is  only  a  difference  of 
temperature  which  distinguishes  these  three  from  the  rest,  just 
as  it  also  in  a  similar  respect  distinguishes  them  from  each  other. 

In  connexion  with  the  effect  of  heat  it  may  be  remarked  (and 
perhaps  has  been  remarked  already),  that,  assuming  an  elevated 
temperature  for  the  internal  parts  of  the  earth,  then  it  is  evident 
that  at  a  ver}'  moderate  distance  from  the  surface,  as  compared 
with  the  earth's  diameter,  the  substances  composing  the  earth 
must  be  destitute  of  such  magnetic  power  as  is  possessed  by  a 
magnet;  and,  at  a  distance  somewhat  greater,  none  of  them  can 
retain  even  that  power  which  soft  iron  has  of  becoming  magnetic 
by  induction.  In  such  case,  whether  the  earth  be  considered  as 
magnetic  of  itself,  like  a  loadstone,  or  rendered  magnetic  by  in- 
duction under  the  influence  of  external  magnetic  masses,  as  the 
sun  for  instance ;  still  it  can  only  be  in  its  crust  that  the  magnetic 
power  could  be  developed.  Assuming  with  Ampere,  that  the 
magnetism  of  the  earth  is  due  to  electric  currents  circulating 
around  it  parallel  to  the  equator,  then  of  course  the  above  ob- 
servations regarding  the  effects  of  heat  would  not  apply. 

Royal  Institution, 
June  7>  1845. 

^  Philosophical  Magazine,  183G,  vol.  viii.  p.  177  ;  or  Exp.  Res.  ii.  217. 


447 


Thoughts  on  Rmj-vihratiom  K 
To  Richard  Phillips,  Esq. 

Dear  Sib,  . 
At  your  request  I  will  endeavour  to  convey  to  you  a  notion  ot 
that  which  1  ventured  to  say  at  the  close  of  the  last  Friday- 
evening  Meeting,  incidental  to  the  account  I  gave  of  Wheat- 
stone's°electro-magnetic  chronoscope ;  but  from  first  to  last  un- 
derstand that  T  merely  threw  out  as  matter  for  speculation,  the 
vague  impressions  of  my  mind,  for  I  gave  nothing  as  the  result 
of  "sufficient  consideration,  or  as  the  settled  conviction,  or  even 
probable  conclusion  at  which  I  had  arrived. 

The  point  intended  to  be  set  forth  for  the  consideration  of  the 
hearers  was,  whether  it  was  not  possible  that  the  vibrations 
which  In  a  cartain  theory  are  assumed  to  account  for  radiation 
and  radiant  phfenomena  may  not  occur  in  the  lines  of  force 
which  connect  particles,  and  consequently  masses  of  matter 
together ;  a  notion  which,  as  far  as  it  is  admitted,  will  dispense 
wi'th  the  Eether,  which,  in  another  view,  is  supposed  to  be  the 
medium  in  which  these  vibrations  take  place. 

You  are  aware  of  the  speculation^  which  I  some  time  since 
uttered  respecting  that  view  of  the  nature  of  matter  which  con- 
siders its  ultimate  atoms  as  centres  of  force,  and  not  as  so  many 
little  bodies  surrounded  by  forces,  the  bodies  being  considered 
in  the  abstract  as  independent  of  the  forces  and  capable  of 
existing  without  them.  In  the  latter  view,  these  httle  particles 
have  a  definite  form  and  a  certain  limited  size  ;  in  the  former 
view  such  is  not  the  case,  for  that  which  represents  size  may  be 
considered  as  extending  to  any  distance  to  which  the  hnes  of 
force  of  the  particle  extend :  the  particle  indeed  is  supposed  to 
exist  only  by  these  forces,  and  where  they  are  it  is.  The  con- 
sideration of  matter  under  this  view  gradually  led  me  to  look  at 
the  lines  of  force  as  being  perhaps  the  seat  of  the  vibrations  of 
ratiiant  phaeiiomena. 

Another  consideration  bearing  conjointly  on  the  hypothetical 
view  both  of  matter  and  radiation,  arises  from  the  comparison 


'  I'hilosophical  Magazine,  S.  ?.,  vol.  xxviii.  No.  1 88,  May  184G. 

2  Philosophical  Magazine,  1844,  vol.  xxiv.  p.  136  ;  or  Exp.  Res.  ii.  284. 


448  Thoughts  on  ray -vibrations.         [May  1846. 

of  the  velocities  with  which  the  radiant  action  and  certain  powers 
of  matter  are  transmitted.    The  velocity  of  light  through  space 
is  about  190,000  miles  in  a  second ;  the  velocity  of  electricity  is, 
by  the  experiments  of  Wheatstone,  shown  to  be  as  great  as  this, 
if  not  greater :  the  light  is  supposed  to  be  transmitted  by  vibra- 
tions through  an  eether  which  is,  so  to  speak,  destitute  of  gravi- 
tation, but  infinite  in  elasticity;  the  electricity  is  transmitted 
through  a  small  metalHc  wire,  and  is  often  viewed  as  transmitted 
by  vibrations  also.    That  the  electric  transference  depends  on 
the  forces  or  powers  of  the  matter  of  the  wire  can  hardly  be 
doubted,  when  we  consider  the  different  conductibility  of  the 
various  metallic  and  other  bodies;  the  means  of  affecting  it  by 
heat  or  cold ;  the  way  in  which  conducting  bodies  by  combina- 
tion enter  into  the  constitution  of  non-conducting  substances, 
and  the  contrary ;  and  the  actual  existence  of  one  elementary 
body,  carbon,  both  in  the  conducting  and  non-conducting  state. 
The  power  of  electric  conduction  (being  a  transmission  of  force 
equal  in  velocitv  to  that  of  light)  appears  to  be  tied  up  in  and 
dependent  upon  the  properties  of  the  matter,  and  is,  as  it  were, 

existent  in  them. 

I  suppose  we  may  compare  together  the  matter  of  the  aether 
and  ordinary  matter  (as,  for  instance,  the  copper  of  the  wire 
through  which  the  electricity  is  conducted),  and  consider  them 
as  aUke  in  their  essential  constitution ;  i.  e.  either  as  both  com- 
posed of  little  nuclei,  considered  in  the  abstract  as  matter,  and 
of  force  or  power  associated  with  these  nuclei,  or  else  both  con- 
sisting of  mere  centres  of  force,  according  to  Boscovich's  theory 
and  the  view  put  forth  in  my  speculation  ;  for  there  is  no  reason 
to  assume  that  the  nuclei  are  more  requisite  in  the  one  case 
than  in  the  other.    It  is  true  that  the  copper  gravitates  and  the 
rether  does  not,  and  that  therefore  the  copper  is  ponderable  and 
the  «ther  is  not ;  but  that  cannot  indicate  the  presence  of  nuclei 
in  the  copper  more  than  in  the  lether,  for  of  all  the  powers  of 
matter  gravitation  is  the  one  in  which  the  force  extends  to  the 
greatest  possible  distance  from  the  supposed  nucleus,  being  in- 
finite in  relation  to  the  size  of  the  latter,  and  reducing  that 
nucleus  to  a  mere  centre  of  force.    The  smallest  atom  of  matter 
on  the  earth  acts  directly  on  the  smallest  atom  of  matter  m 
the  sun,  though  thev  are  95,000,000  of  miles  apart ;  further, 
atoms  which,  to  our  knowledge,  are  at  least  nineteen  times  that 


May  1846.] 


Thoughts  on  ray-vibratio7is. 


449 


distance,  and  indeed,  in  cometary  masses,  far  more,  are  in  a 
similar  way  tied  together  by  the  lines  of  force  extending  from 
and  belonging  to  each.  What  is  there  in  the  condition  of  the 
particles  of  the  supposed  eether,  if  there  be  even  only  one  such 
particle  between  us  and  the  sun,  that  can  in  subtilty  and  extent 
compare  to  this  ? 

Let  us  not  be  confused  by  the  ponderability  and  gravitation 
of  heavy  matter,  as  if  they  proved  the  presence  of  the  abstract 
•nuclei;  these  are  due  not  to  the  nuclei,  but  to  the  force  super- 
added to  them,  if  the  nuclei  exist  at  all ;  and,  if  the  cether  parti- 
cles be  without  this  force,  which  according  to  the  assumption  is 
the  case,  then  they  are  more  material,  in  the  abstract  sense,  than 
the  matter  of  this  our  globe ;  for  matter,  according  to  the  as- 
sumption, being  made  up  of  nuclei  and  force,  the  Eether  parti- 
cles have  in  this  respect  proportionately  more  of  the  nucleus  and 
less  of  the  force. 

On  the  other  hand,  the  infinite  elasticity  assumed  as  belong- 
ing to  the  particles  of  the  aether,  is  as  striking  and  positive  a 
force  of  it  as  gravity  is  of  ponderable  particles,  and  produces  in 
its  way  effects  as  great;  in  witness  whereof  w^e  have  all  the 
varieties  of  radiant  agency  as  exhibited  in  luminous,  calorific, 
and  actinic  phaenomena. 

Perhaps  I  am  in  error  in  thinking  the  idea  generally  formed 
of  the  aether  is  that  its  nuclei  are  almost  infinitely  small,  and 
that  such  force  as  it  has,  namely  its  elasticity,  is  almost  infinitely 
intense.  But  if  such  be  the  received  notion,  what  then  is  left  in 
the  aether  but  force  or  centres  of  force  ?  As  gravitation  and 
solidity  do  not  belong  to  it,  perhaps  many  may  admit  this  con- 
clusion ;  but  what  are  gravitation  and  solidity  ?  certainly  not  the 
weight  and  contact  of  the  abstract  nuclei.  The  one  is  the  con- 
sequence of  an  attractive  force,  which  can  act  at  distances  as 
great  as  the  mind  of  man  can  estimate  or  conceive;  and  the 
other  is  the  consequence  of  a  repulsive  force,  which  forbids  for 
ever  the  contact  or  touch  of  any  two  nuclei ;  so  that  these 
powers  or  properties  should  not  in  any  degree  lead  those  per- 
sons who  conceive  of  the  aether  as  a  thing  consisting  of  force 
only,  to  think  any  otherwise  of  ponderable  matter,  except  that  it 
has  more  and  other /orces  associated  with  it  than  the  aether  has. 

In  experimental  philosophy  we  can,  by  the  phaenomena  pre- 
sented, recognize  various  kinds  of  lines  of  force ;  thus  there  are 

VOL.  tii.  2  G 


450  ThougJits  on  raij-vibrations.        [May.  1846. 

the  lines  of  gravitating  force,  those  of  electro- static  induction, 
those  of  magnetic  action,  and  others  partaking  of  a  dynamic 
character  might  be  perhaps  included.    The  lines  of  electric  and 
magnetic  action  are  by  many  considered  as  exerted  through  space 
like  the  lines  of  gravitatihg  force.    For  my  own  part,  I  inchne 
to  beheve  that  when  there  are  intervening  particles  of  matter 
(being  themselves  only  centres  of  force),  they  take  part  in  carry- 
ing on  the  force  through  the  line,  but  that  when  there  are  none, 
the  line  proceeds  through  space Whatever  the  view  adopted 
respecting  them  may  be,  we  can,  at  all  events,  affect  these  Imes 
of  force  in  a  manner  which  may  be  conceived  as  partaking  of  the 
nature  of  a  shake  or  lateral  vibration.    For  suppose  two  bodies, 
A  B,  distant  from  each  other  and  under  mutual  action,  and 
therefore  connected  by  lines  of  force,  and  let  us  fix  our  attention 
upon  one  resultant  offeree  having  an  invariable  direction  as  re- 
gards space;  if  one  of  the  bodies  move  in  the  least  degree  right 
or  left,  or  if  its  power  be  shifted  for  a  moment  within  the  mass 
(neither  of  these  cases  being  difficult  to  realize  if  A  and  B  be 
either  electric  or  magnetic  bodies),  then  an  effect  equivalent  to  a 
lateral  disturbance  will  take  place  in  the  resultant  upon  which 
we  are  fixing  our  attention ;  for,  either  it  will  increase  in  force 
whilst  the  neighbouring  resultants  are  diminishing,  or  it  will  fall 
in  force  as  they  are  increasing. 

It  may  be  asked,  what  lines  of  force  are  there  in  nature  which 
are  fitted  to  convey  such  an  action  and  supply  for  the  vibrating 
theory  the  place  of  the  eether  ?    I  do  not  pretend  to  answer  this 
question  with  any  confidence ;  all  I  can  say  is,  that  I  do  not  per- 
ceive in  any  part  of  space,  whether  (to  use  the  common  phrase) 
vacant  or  filled  with  matter,  anything  but  forces  and  the  lines  in 
which  they  are  exerted.    The  fines  of  weight  or  gravitating 
force  are,  certainly,  extensive  enough  to  answer  m  this  respect 
any  demand  made  upon  them  by  radiant  phenomena;  and  so, 
probably,  are  the  fines  of  magnetic  force:  and  then  who  can 
forget  that  Mossotti  has  shown  that  gravitation,  aggregation, 
electric  force,  and  electro-chemical  action  may  afi  have  one 
common  connection  or  origin ;  and  so,  in  their  actions  at  a  di- 
stance, may  have  in  common  that  infinite  scope  which  some  ot 
these  actions  are  known  to  possess  ? 

1  Experimental  Researches  in  Electricity,  pars.  116],  1613,  1663,  1710, 
1729.  1735,  2443. 


May  1846.]         Thoughts  on  r-ay -vibrations.  451 

The  view  which  I  am  so  bold  as  to  put  forth  considers,  there- 
fore, radiation  as  a  high  species  of  vibration  in  the  lines  of  force 
which  are  known  to  connect  particles  and  also  masses  of  matter 
together.  It  endeavours  to  dismiss  the  aether,  but  not  the 
vibrations.  The  kind  of  vibration  which,  1  believe,  can  alone 
account  for  the  wonderful,  varied,  and  beautiful  phsenomena  of 
polarization,  is  not  the  same  as  that  which  occurs  on  the  surface 
of  disturbed  water,  or  the  waves  of  sound  in  gases  or  liquids, 
for  the  vibrations  in  these  cases  are  direct,  or  to  and  from  the 
centre  of  action,  whereas  the  former  are  lateral.  It  seems  to  me, 
that  the  resultant  of  two  or  more  lines  of  force  is  in  an  apt  con- 
dition for  that  action  which  may  be  considered  as  equivalent  to 
a  lateral  vibration ;  whereas  a  uniform  medium,  Hke  the  aether, 
does  not  appear  apt,  or  more  apt  than  air  or  water. 

The  occurrence  of  a  change  at  one  end  of  a  line  of  force  easily 
suggests  a  consequent  change  at  the  other.  The  propagation  of 
light,  and  therefore  probably  of  all  radiant  action,  occupies  time ; 
and,  that  a  vibration  of  the  line  of  force  should  account  for  the 
pheenomena  of  radiation,  it  is  necessary  that  such  vibration 
should  occupy  time  also.  I  am  not  aware  whether  there  are  any 
data  by  which  it  has  been,  or  could  be  ascertained  whether  such 
a  power  as  gravitation  acts  without  occupying  time,  or  whether 
lines  of  force  being  already  in  existence,  such  a  lateral  dis- 
turbance of  them  at  one  end  as  I  have  suggested  above,  would 
require  time,  or  must  of  necessity  be  felt  instantly  at  the  other 
end. 

As  to  that  condition  of  the  lines  of  force  which  represents  the 
assumed  high  elasticity  of  the  aether,  it  cannot  in  this  respect  be 
deficient :  the  question  here  seems  rather  to  be,  whether  the  Unes 
are  sluggish  enough  in  their  action  to  render  them  equivalent  to 
the  aether  in  respect  of  the  time  known  experimentally  to  be  oc- 
cupied in  the  transmission  of  radiant  force. 

The  aether  is  assumed  as  pervading  all  bodies  as  well  as  space  : 
in  the  view  now  set  forth,  it  is  the  forces  of  the  atomic  centres 
which  pervade  (and  make)  all  bodies,  and  also  penetrate  all  space. 
As  regards  space,  the  difference  is,  that  the  aether  presents  suc- 
cessive parts  or  centres  of  action,  and  the  present  supposition 
only  lines  of  action  ;  as  regards  matter,  the  difference  is,  that  the 
aether  lies  between  the  particles  and  so  carries  on  the  vibi-ations, 
whilst  as  respects  the  supposition,  it  is  by  the  lines  offeree  bc~ 

2  G  2 


452  Thoughts  on  ray-vibrations.        [May  1 846. 

tween  the  centres  of  the  particles  that  the  vibration  is  continued. 
As  to  the  difference  in  intensity  of  action  within  matter  under 
the  two  views,  I  suppose  it  will  be  very  difficult  to  draw  any  con- 
clusion, for  when  we  take  the  simplest  state  of  common  matter 
and  that  which  most  nearly  causes  it  to  approximate  to  the  con- 
dition of  the  Eether,  namely  the  state  of  rare  gas,  how  soon  do  we 
find  in  its  elasticity  and  the  mutual  repulsion  of  its  particles,  a 
departure  from  the  law,  that  the  action  is  inversely  as  the  square 

of  the  distance ! 

And  now,  my  dear  Phillips,  I  must  conclude.    I  do  not  think 
1  should  have  allowed  these  notions  to  have  escaped  from  me, 
had  I  not  been  led  unawares,  and  without  previous  consideration, 
by  the  circumstances  of  the  evening  on  which  I  had  to  appear 
suddenly  and  occupy  the  place  of  another.    Now  that  I  have 
put  them  on  paper,  I  feel  that  I  ought  to  have  kept  them  much 
longer  for  study,  consideration,  and,  perhaps,  final  rejection ;  and 
it  is  only  because  they  are  sure  to  go  abroad  in  one  way  or 
another,  in  consequence  of  their  utterance  on  that  evening,  that 
I  give  them  a  shape,  if  shape  it  may  be  called,  in  this  reply  to 
your  inquiry.    One  thing  is  certain,  that  any  hypothetical  view 
of  radiation  which  is  likely  to  be  received  or  retained  as  satis- 
factory, must  not  much  longer  comprehend  alone  certain  phe- 
nomena of  light,  but  must  include  those  of  heat  and  of  actinic 
influence  also,  and  even  the  conjoined  phsenomena  of  sensible 
heat  and  chemical  power  produced  by  them.    In  this  respect,  a 
view,  which  is  in  some  degree  founded  upon  the  ordmary  forces 
of  matter,  may  perhaps  find  a  Uttle  consideration  amongst  the 
other  views  that  will  probably  arise.    I  think  it  likely  that  1 
have  made  many  mistakes  in  the  preceding  pages,  for  even  to 
myself,  my  ideas  on  this  point  appear  only  as  the  shadow  of  a 
speculation,  or  as  one  of  those  impressions  on  the  mmd  which 
are  allowable  for  a  time  as  guides  to  thought  and  research.  He 
who  labours  in  experimental  inquiries  knows  how  numerous 
these  are,  and  how  often  their  apparent  fitness  and  beauty 
vanish  before  the  progress  and  development  of  real  natural 
truth. 

I  am,  my  dear  PhiUips, 
Royal  Institution,  Ever  truly  yom-s, 

April  15,  1846.  M.  Faraday. 


453 


On  the  Magnetic  Affection  of  Light,  and  on  the  Distinction 
between  the  Ferromagnetic  and  Diamagnetic  Cenditions  of 
Matter^. 

When  a  ray  of  polarized  light  and  lines  of  magnetic  force  pass 
simultaneously  and  parallel  to  each  other  through  a  transparent 
solid  or  liquid  medium  not  possessing  forces  of  double  refraction, 
the  ray  is  rotated  according  to  a  simple  law  of  action,  which  I 
have  expressed  in  the  last  part  of  the  Philosophical  Transactions^ 
(2160.  2161.)-  When  such  a  ray  passes  through  certain  speci- 
mens of  rock-crystal,  oil  of  turpentine,  &c.,  it  is  also  rotated  ac- 
cording to  a  natural  law  well-known,  without  any  reference  to 
magnetic  force.  A  very  striking  distinction  exists  between  these 
two  cases  of  rotation,  though  they  at  first  appear  to  be  the  same ; 
for  the  former  rotation  is  dependent  in  its  direction  upon  the  lines 
of  magnetic  force,  and  not  upon  the  position  of  the  observer  or  the 
.course  of  the  ray  of  light,  whereas  the  latter  is  dependent  upon 
the  position  of  the  observer  or  the  course  of  the  ray. 

Upon  consideration  it  appeared  that  the  peculiar  character  of 
the  magnetic  rotation  might  be  made  available  in  exalting  the 
final  efiect  of  the  magnetic  force  upon  the  ray,  and  also  in 
demonstrating  many  important  points  in  a  more  marked  man- 
ner and  higher  degree  than  had  yet  been  possible ;  and  upon 
referring  the  idea  to  experiment,  it  was  found  to  be  true.  The 
following  pages  contain  some  of  the  results. 

A  parallelopiped  of  heavy  glass  0*7  of  an  inch  square  and 
2-5  inches  long,  had  the  two  ends  polished  and  silvered.  The 
silvering  was  then  removed  from  a  space  about  0"1  of  an  inch 
wide  along  one  of  the  edges  of  one  end,  and  also  from  a  corre- 
sponding space  on  the  other  end,  except  that  the  parts  cleared 
were  on  the  contrary  sides  of  the  parallelopiped ;  so  that  each 
end  was  furnished  with  a  good  plane  reflector,  but  these  over- 
lapped each  other  (fig.  2).  In  consequence  of  this  arrangement, 
a  ray  of  light  could  be  transmitted  diagonally  across  the  length 
of  the  piece  of  glass;  or  the  ray,  alter  entering  at  one  end, 
could  be  reflected  two  or  more  times  within  the  glass  and  then 
allowed  to  pass  out. 

'  Phil.  Mag.  Sept.  and  Oct.  1846. 

'  1846,  part  i.  pp.  4,  5.    [Phil.  Mag.  vol.  xxviii.  pp.  298,  299.] 


Fig.  1. 


454  Magnetic  affection  of  light.        [Sept.  1846. 

A  similar  piece  of  heavy  glass  was  silvered  at  the  two  ends 
and  one  side  of  the  prism ;  and  the  silvering  was  then  removed 
at  the  ends  for  the  space  of  0-1  of  an  inch  from  those  edges 
which  were  the  furthest  from  the  silvered  side  (fig.  1).  A  ray 
of  light  passing  in  at  the  unsilvered  part  of  one  end  with  a 
certain  degree  of  obliquity,  could  be  reflected  at  the  other  end, 
then  at  the  side,  and  again  at  the  first 
end,  passing  thus  three  times  along  the 
glass  and  finally  out  at  the  second  end. 
At  other  incHnations  the  ray  would  pass 
five,  seven,  nine,  eleven,  or  a  greater 
number  of  times  along  the  glass  before 

it  issued  forth  on  its  course  through  the  air  to  the  eye  of  the 
observer. 

Either  of  these  pieces  of  glass  could  produce  the  desired 
result  of  repeated  reflexions  within,  but  the  first  form  was  found 
most  convenient  in  use.    When  a  strong  light  was  employed,  it 
was  not  difficult  to  follow  the  series  of  images  produced  by 
successive  reflexion  up  to  the  ninth  or  tenth  image,  these  cor- 
responding of  course  to  a  transit  of  the  ray  seventeen  or  nineteen 
times  along  the  substance  of  the  glass.    A  little  change  of  posi- 
tion of  the  silvered  glass  between  the  Nichol's  prisms  used  as 
the  polarising  and  analysing  apparatus,  was  sufficient  to  bring 
any  one  of  these  images  into  view,  the  glass  being  at  the  same 
time  under  the  full  influence  of  the  electro-magnet,  or  the  helix, 
employed  to  generate  lines  of  magnetic  force.   A  further  advan- 
tage is  gained  if  the  ends  of  the  piece  of  glass  are  not  quite 
parallel  to  each  other,  the  sides  proceeding  from  the  edges  where 
the  ray  enters  and  issues  forth  being  in  a  very  slight  degree 
different  in  length.    This  arrangement  causes  the  series  of  re- 
flected images  to  open  out  if  seen  at  one  end  and  to  close  up  if 
seen  at  the  other,  and  thus  the  observation  of  a  particular  nnage 
or  the  simultaneous  comparison  of  two  or  more  images,  is 

favoured. 

On  considering  the  eflfect  of  this  ar- 
rangement, it  is  evident  that  if  ABCD 
represent  a  trough  of  solution  of 
sugar,  or  any  other  body  having  the 
ordinary  rotating  influence  over  a  po- 
larized ray,  then  a  ray  sent  in  at  D 


Fig.  2. 


Sept.  1846.]  Bepeated  reflexions.  455 

and  passing  oxit  at  A  would  be  rotated  to  a  certain  amount. 
But  if,  instead  of  proceeding  onwards  at  A,  it  were  reflected  by 
the  surface  AF  to  E,  and  were  there  observed,  it  would  be 
found  to  have  received  no  rotation,  for  the  effect  produced  in 
going  from  D  to  A  would  be  exactly  compensated  by  its  return 
from  A  to  E.  Or  if  the  reflexions  were  made  more  numerous 
and  recurred  at  E  F  and  C,  so  that  the  ray  should  traverse  the 
body  five  times,  still  an  amount  of  rotation  equal  only  to  that 
which  its  passage  once  along  the  substance  could  effect  would 
be  finally  produced. 

Such  would  not  be  the  case  if  A  B  C  D  were  a  diamagnetic, 
rotating  the  ray  by  means  of  magnetic  force  ;  for  then,  which- 
ever way  the  ray  was  passing,  it  would  still  be  rotated  in  the 
same  direction  in  relation  to  the  lines  of  force.  So  if  observed 
issuing  forth  at  A,  it  would  have  an  amount  of  rotation  (which 
we  may  call  right-handed)  equal  to  what  one  transit  across  the 
diamagnetic  could  produce ;  if  observed  at  E,  it  would  have  an 
amount  of  left-handed  rotation  double  the  amount  of  the  first 
or  unit  quantity ;  if  observed  at  F,  it  would  have  three  times 
the  first  amount  of  right-handed  rotation ;  if  observed  at  C,  four 
times  the  amount  of  left-handed  rotation;  and  at  B  would 
possess  five  times  the  original  amount  of  right-handed  rotation. 

This  was  confirmed  by  the  result  of  an  experiment.  The  great 
magnet  described  in  the  Philosophical  Transactions  ^  (2247.)  was 
employed,  and  the  parallelepiped  of  glass  (fig.  2)  submitted  to 
its  powers ;  the  direct  ray,  or  that  producing  the  first  image  of 
the  luminous  object,  acquired  a  right-handed  rotation  equal  to 
12°.  Moving  the  glass  a  little  the  second  image  was  brought 
into  view,  or  that  produced  by  the  ray  which  had  traversed  the 
glass  three  times,  and  its  rotation  was  36°.  The  third  image 
was  then  observed,  and  the  rotation  of  the  ray  producing  it  was 
60°,  as  rifearly  as  my  rough  apparatus  could  measure  angular 
quantities.  The  same  general  results  were  obtained  with  the 
second  piece  of  glass  described. 

The  experiment  proves  in  a  very  striking  manner,  that  which- 
ever way  the  ray  of  light  is  passing  through  the  interposed  body, 
the  direction  of  its  rotation  depends  essentially  and  alone  upon 
the  direction  of  the  lines  of  magnetic  force. 

It  also  proves  and  makes  manifest  in  a  manner  not  to  be  rais- 
'  1846,  p.  22.    Phil.  Mag.  vol.  xxviii.  p.  398. 


456 


Magnetic  affection  of  light.       [Sept.  1846. 


taken,  the  difference  in  tfiis  respect  between  the  magnetic  rotation 
of  the  ray  and  that  produced  by  quartz,  sugar,  oil  of  turpentine, 
and  such  bodies. 

Either  by  independent  or  by  conjoint  observations  of  the 
different  images,  it  proves  that  the  effect  is  proportionate  to  the 
length  of  ray  submitted  to  the  magnetic  force  (2163.) ;  for  the 
unit  length  and  multiples  of  the  unit  length  may  be  observed  at 
once,  the  intensity  of  the  magnetic  force  and  other  circumstances 
remaining  unchanged. 

It  permits  the  attainment  of  a  far  greater  degree  of  accuracy 
in  the  measurement  of  the  amount  of  rotation  of  a  given  ray,  or 
in  the  estimation  of  the  comparative  degrees  of  rotation  of  the 
different  coloured  rays. 

The  form  of  the  arrangement  makes  a  short  piece  of  any 
given  diamagnetic,  as  a  crystal,  &c.,  sufficient  for  an  experi- 
ment, which  would  not  suffice  if  the  ray  were  passed  but  once 
through  it. 

It  allows  of  the  concentration  of  the  magnetic  force  by  an 
approximation  of  the  poles,  when  a  magnet  is  used,  so  as  to 
exalt  the  effect;  or  to  render  a  weak  magnet  equivalent  to  a 
stronger  one,  so  that  even  good  ordinary  magnets  may  now  be 
made  available.  Or  if  a  hehx  be  used,  a  much  shorter  and 
weaker  one  than  that  which  before  was  necessary,  may  now  be 
employed. 

Having  ascertained  the  great  advantage  which  this  form  of 
apparatus  possessed,  for  the  examination  of  many  substances 
which  would  give  no  sensible  results  by  the  process  I  formerly 
described,  I  proceeded  to  apply  it  to  the  cases  of  air  and  some 
doubly  refracting  bodies  (2237.)-  For  this  purpose  I  made  the 
faces  of  the  magnetic  poles  reflectors,  by  applying  to  each  a 
polished  plate  of  steel ;  and  as  the  poles  were  moveable,  their 
reflecting  surfaces  could  be  placed  at  any  distance  and  in  any 
position  required,  the  substance  experimented  on  being  between 
them. 

^Ir, — I  could  obtain  no  signs  of  action  upon  the  ray  when 
air  was  between  the  magnetic  poles,  even  with  the  fourth,  fifth 
and  sixth  images. 

Eock-crystal. — The  cubes  of  this  substance  formerly  described 
(2178.)  were  submitted  to  examination;  but  I  could  detect  no 
trace  of  action  on  the  ray  of  light  when  passing  through  them, 


Sept.  1846.] 


Repeated  reflexions. 


457 


although  they  were  0*75  of  an  inch  in  the  side,  and  the  ray  was 
observed  after  passing  seven,  and  even  nine  times  across  them. 
The  cubes  were  examined  in  all  directions. 

Iceland  Spar. — A  cube  of  this  substance  (2179.)  was  examined 
in  the  same  manner,  but  I  obtained  no  efi'ect.  ' 

Heavy  glass  presented  the  expected  phsenomena  easily  and 
well. 

Failing  to  procure  any  positive  result  in  these  trials,  either 
with  air  or  with  doubly  refracting  crystals,  I  silvered  the  latter 
in  the  manner  that  had  been  employed  for  the  heavy  glass,  that 
the  magnetic  poles  might  be  brought  as  close  as  possible ;  still 
no  evidence  of  any  magnetic  action  on  the  ray  could  be  observed. 

A  natural  six-sided  prism  of  rock-crystal,  2*3  inches  in  length, 
was  polished  and  silvered  at  the  ends :  no  magnetic  effect  upon 
the  light  could  be  observed  with  this  crystal  with  either  the 
first,  second  or  third  image. 

M.  E.  Becquerel  thinks  that  he  has  observed  an  effect 
produced  in  doubly  refracting  crystalline  bodies ;  and  it  is 
probable  that  his  apparatus  is  far  more  delicate  for  the  ob- 
servance of  optical  changes  than  mine.  In  that  case,  if  com- 
bined with  the  method  founded  on  repeated  transits  of  the  ray, 
it  perhaps  would  produce  very  distinct  results ;  but  the  latter 
process  alone  has  not  as  yet  given  any  evidence  of  the  action 
sought  after. 

Certain  indications  led  me  to  look  with  interest  for  any 
possible  effect  which  the  crossing  of  the  reflected  rays  might 
produce  in  the  arrangement  of  reflectors  and  glass  represented 
in  fig.  1 ;  but  I  could  find  no  difference  of  action  between  it 
and  the  other  arrangement,  fig.  2,  in  which  no  such  crossing 
occurred. 


Near  the  close  of  last  year  I  sent  to  the  Royal  Society  two 
papers  On  the  Magnetic  Condition  of  all  matter'  (2243.  2343.), 
in  which  I  believe  that  I  proved  the  existence  of  a  magnetic  ac- 
tion new  to  our  knowledge  ;  antithetical  in  its  nature  to  the 
magnetism  manifested  by  iron  in  any  of  its  forms  or  conditions, 
strong  or  weak,  or  to  that  magnetism  which  iron  could,  in  any 
quantity  or  under  any  circumstances,  produce.    Further,  that 

'  Philosophical  Transactions,  1846,  p.  21,  or  Phil,  iVlag.  vol.  xxviii,  1846, 


458  Diamagnetic  condition  of  matter.    [Sept.  1846. 

all  bodies  not  magnetic  as  iron,  were  magnetic  according  to  this 
new  mode  of  action  ;  and  that  as  attraction  by  the  magnet  marked 
the  magnetic  condition  of  iron,  however  small  its  quantity,  or 
whatever  its  state  might  be,  so  repulsion  w^as  the  distinctive 
characteristic  of  all  those  bodies  which  were  naturally  fitted  to 
acquire  the  new  state,  and  develope  this  new  form  of  power. 

M.  Becquerel  has  sent  a  note  to  the  Academy  of  Sciences S 
in  which  he  states  certain  results  of  his  own  much  anterior  to 
mine,  due  to  ordinary  magnetic  action,  and  in  which  the  po- 
sition of  the  substances  was  across  the  magnetic  axis.    I  need 
not  quote  the  whole,  but  will  select  the  following  words  at  the 
end:— "From  these  facts  it  results  that  the  magnetic  effects 
produced  in  steel  or  in  soft  iron  by  the  influence  of  a  magnet, 
differ  from  those  which  occur  in  all  bodies,  in  this  ;  that  in  the 
first  the  distribution  of  magnetism  is  always  in  the  direction  of 
the  length,  whilst  in  tritoxide  of  iron,  wood,  gumlac,  &c.,  it 
occurs  generally  in  a  transverse  direction,  especially  when  they 
are  formed  into  needles.    This  difference  of  effect  is  due  to  the 
circumstance,  that  the  magnetism  being  very  weak  in  these  bodies, 
we  may  neglect  the  reaction  of  the  particles  of  the  bodies  on 
themselves."    These  words,  and  the  time  of  their  pubHcation 
(January  1846),  sufficiently  show  that  M.  Becquerel  does  not 
admit  the  new  form  or  condition  of  magnetic  action,  which  I 
supposed  I  had  previously  demonstrated. 

M.  E.  Becquerel,  in  a  communication  to  the  Academy  of  the 
date  of  June  1846^,  after  confirming  the  action  on  fight  which 
I  had- announced,  touches  the  question  of  magnetic  action  on 
all  bodies ;  and  at  this  late  period  is  still  of  the  same  opinion 
as  his  father.  I  need  quote  only  a  few  brief  fines  here  and  there 
to  show  this  state  of  his  mind.  After  speaking  of  Coulomb's 
results,  and  of  his  father's  in  1827,  he  says,  "These  experi- 
ments have  been  made  nearly  twenty  years,  and  nevertheless 
M  Faraday  has  announced  anew  the  phaenoraenon  of  trans- 
verse direction,  has  made  of  the  bodies  which  place  them- 
selves thus  a  new  class  of  substances,  and  has  named  them 

diamagnetic  substances  I  ask  myself  how,  under 

these  circumstances,  one  can  push  the  spirit  of  classification 
thus  far,  when  one  may  give  to  the  same  substance  all  the  va- 

•  Comptes  Rendm,  1846,  p.  147.  =  1^^^.  1846,  p.  595. 


Sept.  1846.]    Diamagnetic  condition  of  matter.  459 

rious  positions  of  longitudinal,  transverse  or  oblique.  In  fact, 
place  the  two  extremities  of  two  strong  magnets  opposite  each 
other,  at  0-08  or  0-12  of  an  inch  apart,  and  at  about  0-04  from, 
their  surface,  suspend  by  means  of  cocoon  silk,  a  small  needle 
of  wood  or  of  copper,  about  0  04  in  diameter  and  1-9  or  2-3 
inches  long,  it  will  place  itself  transversely.  If  the  needle  be 
cut  in  two  and  again  divided,  &c.,  we  shall  end  by  having  a 
fragment,  which  will  place  itself  in  the  hne  of  the  poles.  It 
is  simply  a  pheenomenon  of  the  resultant  forces  ;  for  we  may 
give  to  one  and  the  same  substance  these  different  positions, 
according  to  its  form,  by  modifying  the  distance  of  the  poles." 
Then,  speaking  of  the  small  quantity  of  iron  which  he  found 
in  certain  specimens,  and  of  his  former  statement,  that  these 
substances  behaved  as  a  mixture  of  inert  matter  and  magnetic 
particles,  or  as  ferruginous  mixtures,  he  says,  "all  these  con- 
clusions still  subsist  at  this  day  in  all  their  generality." 

These  conclusions  from  two  profound  philosophers,  so  well 
able  in  every  respect  to  judge  any  question  arising  on  such  a 
subject  as  magnetism,  made  me  anxious  on  two  accounts;  for 
first,  I  thought  it  possible  1  might  really  be  in  error  respect- 
ing the  broad  and  general  principle  of  magnetic  action,  which 
I  supposed  I  had  discovered ;  and  next,  that  if  right  on  that 
point,  I  must  have  been  sadly  deficient  in  describing  my  re- 
sults not  to  have  conveyed  a  better  impression  to  the  minds  of 
those  so  competent  to  receive  and  understand.  I  therefore, 
for  my  own  sake,  entered  into  an  examination  of  this  point ; 
for  thoiigh  I  am  nearly  indifferent  to  the  fate  of  any  specula- 
tive or  hypothetical  view  I  may  venture  to  send  forth,  I  am 
far  from  being  so  as  regards  the  correctness  of  any  announce- 
ment 1  may  make  of  a  law  of  action  or  a  new  fact ;  and  having 
carefully  experimented  on  one  or  two  of  the  cases  of  transverse 
position  assumed  by  certain  bodies  magnetic,  as  iron,  I  now 
give  the  general  result. 

Some  good  uniform  peroxide  of  iron  (being  one  of  the  sub- 
stances which  M.  Becquerel  experimented  with)  was  prepared 
and  introduced  regularly  into  a  thin  glass  tube,  0'25  of  an  inch 
in  diameter  and  I  '4  inch  long ;  it  was  then  suspended  by  a  long 
filament  of  cocoon  silk,  and  could  be  brought  into  any  position 
relative  to  one  of  the  poles  of  a  strong  electro-magnet,  which 
could  be  made  to  assume  various  forms  by  the  use  of  terminal 


460  Diamagnetic  condition  of  matter.    [Sept.  1846. 

pieces  of  iron.  As  peroxide  of  iron  can  occasionally  receive  and 
retain  a  feeble  magnetic  state,  it  is  necessary  the  experimenter 
should  be  aware  of  the  possibility,  and  guard  against  its  effect 
in  producing  irregular  results. 

The  pole  of  the  magnet  was  in  the  first  place  a  cone,  of 
which  the  base  was  1-5  inch  in  diameter,  its  axis  being  in  a 
horizontal  line.  The  cylinder  of  peroxide  of  iron  was  advanced 
towards  the  cone  with  its  centre  of  suspension  in  a  line  with 
the  axis.  When  within  the  influence  of  the  magnet,  and  trans- 
verse to  the  axial  line,  it  retained  that  position ;  but  this  was  a 
position  of  unstable  equilibrium ;  for  if  the  cylinder  became 
oblique  to  the  axial  line  on  either  side,  then  the  end  nearest 
to  the  cone  approached  towards  it,  being  attracted,  and  at  last 
went  up  to  and  remained  against  it.  But  whether  directly 
across  the  axial  line,  and  so  in  the  position  of  unstable  equi- 
librium, or  in  any  other  position,  the  centre  of  gravity  of  the 
whole  was  always  attracted;  an  effect  easily  appreciated  with 
an  electro-magnet  by  interrupting  and  renewing  the  excitmg 

As  a  contrast  with  diamagnetic  bodies,  I  will  state,  that  if 
a  similar  cylinder  of  phosphorus,  bismuth,  or  heavy  glass  be 
placed  in  precisely  the  same  circumstances,  then  the  transverse 
position  is  a  position  of  stable  equilibrium  :  if  the  cyhnder  be 
moved  from  it,  it  returns  by  vibrations  into  it;  and  durmg  the 
whole  time  the  centre  of  gravity  of  the  mass  is  repelled. 

A  square  end  was  now  given  to  the  pole  of  the  magnet,  the 
face  opposed  to  the  cyhnder  of  peroxide  being  1-75  mch  wide 
and  of  an  equal  height.  The  axial  line  is  that  which  passed 
}iorizontally  from  the  middle  of  this  face,  and  took  its  course 
through  the  centre  of  gravity  of  the  cylinder,  which  was  also  its 
centre  of  rotation.  When  the  cylinder  was  at  any  distance 
less  than  0-3  of  an  inch  from  the  face  of  the  pole,  it  stood  parallel 
to  the  face,  and  therefore  transverse  to  the  axial  line :  being 
moved  out  of  this  position,  it  resumed  it,  so  that  the  position 
was  one  of  stable  equilibrium.  At  distances  a  httle  greater  this 
became  a  position  of  unstable  equihbrium,  and  two  positions  of 
stable  equihbrium  were  found  equally  inclined  on  the  opposite  side 
of  the  transverse  position,  becoming  more  and  more  obhque  to 
it  as  the  distance  was  increased.  Both  the  transverse  positions 
and  the  oblique  positions  were  easily  referable  to  the  conceutra- 


Sept.  1846.]    Diamagnetic  condition  of  matter.  461 

tion  of  the  lines  of  magnetic  force  at  the  edges  of  the  square  end 
of  the  magnet.  Effects  due  to  the  same  cause  have  already 
been  pointed  out  (2298.  2299.  2384.)  ^ 

In  every  position  of  the  cylinder  of  peroxide  before  this  mag- 
netic pole,  the  peroxide,  as  a  mass,  was  attracted. 

By  using  another  termination  of  iron,  the  end  of  the  pole 
opposite  the  peroxide  was  enlarged  in  its  horizontal  dimen- 
sions to  2-5  inches.  All  the  former  phaenomena  recurred; 
but  the  distance  between  the  face  of  the  pole  and  the  tube  of 
peroxide  could  be  increased  to  one  inch  or  more,  before  the  tube 
began  to  assume  the  oblique  positions. 

A  third  termination  presented  a  face  having  3-5  inches  of 
horizontal  extension :  the  phaenomena  were  here  precisely  the 
same,  but  the  distance  could  be  increased  to  1-75  inch  before 
the  c'ylinder  ceased  to  be  parallel  to  the  face,  and  began  to 
acquire  an  oblique  position. 

For  the  complete  comprehension  of  this  and  other  effects  due 
to  the  form  of  the  face  of  the  pole,  and  the  concentration  of  the 
lines  of  magnetic  force  passing  through  the  air 
near  the  edges,  I  will  indicate  the  positions 
assumed  by  the  cylinder  of  peroxide,  when  its 
centre  of  suspension  was  preserved  at  a  con- 
stant distanfce  from  the  face  of  the  pole,  but 
was  carried  into  different  positions  on  one  side 
or  the  other  of  the  axial  line.  These  are  re- 
presented in  the  figure;  by  which  it  will  be 
seen,  that  as  the  peroxide  was  carried  to  one 
side  or  the  other  of  the  axial  line  it  became  in- 
clined to  that  line,  in  a  manner  and  to  a  degree 
easily  comprehensible  by  those  who  consider 
the  concentration  of  magnetic  force  at  the  edges 
of  the  face.  The  same  was  the  case  with  the 
former  face  of  2-5  inches.  Either  end  of  the 
cylinder  of  peroxide  might  be  the  end  nearest  to  the  face  of  the 
pole ;  but  the  centre  of  gravity  of  the  cylinder  was  in  every  case 
attracted  by  the  magnet. 

Other  cylinders  of  peroxide  of  iron  of  different  diameters  and 
lengths  were  employed ;  and  when  they  were  smaller  in  length. 

>  Philosophical  Transactions,  1846,  pp.  32,  48. 


462  Diamagnetic  condition  of  matter.    [Sept.  184G. 

than  the  opposed  faces  of  the  magnetic  poles,  the  results  were 

precisely  the  same. 

A  cylinder  of  paper,  magnetic  through  the  presence  of  iron, 
was  used  and  produced  the  same  results. 

Having  been  led  to  think  that  the  disintegration  of  the  per- 
oxide of  iron  had  considerable  influence  over  these  phaenomena, 
by  obstructing  and  preventing  the  communication  of  magnetic 
induction  from  particle  to  particle,  and  was  far  more  influential 
than  the  mere  weakness  of  magnetic  force,  I  took  some  sub- 
stances, even  more  weak  in  magnetic  power  than  the  peroxide, 
and  formed  them  into  cylinders.    The  substances  were  solution 
of  proto-sulphate  of  iron,  muriate  of  cobalt  and  muriate  of  nickel, 
which  were  introduced  into  thin  glass  tubes  0*25  of  an  inch  in 
diameter  and  1-4  inch  long.    These,  when  suspended  before  the 
poles  with  their  centres  of  suspension  in  the  axial  line,  did  not 
act  as  the  peroxide  of  iron  or  the  paper.    They  could  indeed  be 
kept  in  a  position  parallel  to  the  face  of  the  pole,  but  this  was  a 
position  of  unstable  equilibrium;  and  when  the  least  removed 
out  of  that  position,  the  end  nearest  the  magnet  continued  to  ap- 
proach until  it  came  in  contact,  and  then  the  whole  remained  un- 
changed.   The  action  was  precisely  like  that  of  a  piece  of  iron, 
but  very  inferior  in  energy. 

A  saturated  solution  of  proto-sulphate  of  iron  was»diluted  with 
five  times  its  volume  of  water,  and  still  showed  precisely  the  same 
phcenomena  as  the  stronger  solution  :  yet  its  magnetic  power  was 
very  far  inferior  to  the  magnetic  force  of  the  peroxide  of  iron,  as 
was  fully  manifested  by  the  degree  of  the  attraction  of  the  centre 
of  gravity  of  the  two  portions  of  the  substances.  When  the  per- 
oxide was  under  experiment,  the  suspension  thread  was  drawn 
twice  or  even  three  times  further  from  the  perpendicular  than 
when  the  solution  was  used. 

If  a  piece  of  iron  wire  be  substituted  for  the  cylmder  of  per- 
oxide or  the  magnetic  solutions,  it  will  not  remain  parallel  to  the 
face  of  the  pole,  or  oblique  and  not  touching  it;  for  one  end  will 
always  go  up  to  the  face  of  the  pole ;  or  if  it  be  very  short,  and 
then  by  loading,  or  otherwise  be  prevented  from  coming  in  con- 
tact with  the  pole,  one  end  will  point  towards  the  part  of  the 
pole  face  nearest  to  it.  In  this  respect  it  is  as  the  magne  ic 
solution,  and  not  as  the  peroxide:  however  weak  the  magnetic 


Sept.  1846.]    Biamagnetic  condition  of  matter.  46.3 

pole  may  be,  if  it  have  power  to  affect  the  iron  wire  at  all,  it  will 
produce  the  same  effect.  Further,  if  the  iron  wire  be  rendered 
perfectly  free  from  magnetism,  by  making  it  red-hot,  either  end 
may  be  made  that  which  is  nearest  to  the  face  of  the  pole. 

A  piece  of  hematite,  separated,  not  by  an  iron  tool  but  by  an 
agate,  or  otherwise  in  a  careful  manner,  pointed  in  the  manner 
of  ii'on,  though  of  course  not  with  the  same  power,  i.  e.  it  did 
not  take  up  a  stable  position  either  parallel  to  the  face  of  the 
magnet  or  inclined,  but  not  touching  it ;  for  one  end  or  the  other 
always  went  up  to  and  remained  in  contact  with  the  metal  of  the 
pole.  The  heematite,  being  powdered  and  put  into  a  small  tube, 
acted  in  the  same  way  as  when  whole. 

A  piece  of  bottle-glass  tube,  which  was  magnetic  from  the  iron 
it  contained,  acted  as  the  haematite,  either  when  whole  or  pow- 
dered up  and  put  into  a  flint-glass  tube  :  it  therefore  was  unlike 
the  peroxide  of  iron. 

Pure  peroxide  of  manganese  appeared  to  take  a  place  between 
these  bodies  and  the  peroxide  of  iron.  Generally  speaking,  the 
end  nearest  to  the  flat  face  of  the  pole  went  up  to  it  and  remained 
there ;  but  when  one  end  was  opposite  the  edge  of  the  face  and 
the  other  end  nearly  opposite  the  middle,  at  the  time  the  magnet 
was  made  active,  the  latter  end,  though  nearer  than  the  former, 
would  recede,  and  the  former  end  come  up  and  remain  in  contact. 
If  the  latter  end  was  still  nearer,  it  would  approach  from  the 
first ;  and,  there  was  no  place  of  stable  equilibrium  for  the  tube 
in  which  it  remained  parallel  to  the  face,  or  nearly  so,  with  neither 
end  touching  it. 

A  piece  of  thick  platinum  wire  acted  as  the  heematite  or 
green  glass,  and  not  as  the  peroxide  in  Becquerel's  experiment. 
Spongy  platina  pressed  into  a  tube  acted  as  the  peroxide  of  man- 
ganese, giving  like  it  in  certain  situations,  the  beginnings  of  an 
action  like  that  of  the  peroxide  of  iron. 

The  centre  of  gravity  of  all  these  bodies  was  attracted  by  the 
magnet,  whatever  part  of  the  face  they  were  placed  in  juxtapo- 
sition with.    In  no  case  was  anything  like  a  repulsion  shown. 

Now  I  do  not  see  how  any  difficulty  can  arise  in  referring  all 
these  results  of  position  to  the  ordinary  action  of  magnets  upon 
matter  ordinarily  magnetic,  as  iron  is.  All  depends  upon  the 
shape  and  size  of  the  poles,  and  upon  the  state  of  unity  or  disin- 
tegration, more  or  less  complete,  of  the  magnetic  matter;  for 


464  Diamagnetic  condition  of  matter.    [Sept.  1846. 

matter  which  is  much  weaker  in  magnetic  power  than  peroxide 
of  iron,  as  the  sohition  of  nickel,  or  dilute  solution  of  iron,  or  the 
metal  platina,  does  not  act  as  the  peroxide,  but  as  metallic  iron. 
Still,  in  every  case,  the  phEenomena  are  phaenomena  oi attraction-, 
for  not  only  is  the  centre  of  gravity  of  the  whole  mass  attracted, 
but  the  parts  of  the  cylinder  of  peroxide  of  iron,  as  well  as  of 
the  other  magnetic  substances,  are  in  those  positions  which  the 
resultants  of  attractive  force  would  necessarily  give  them.  .  This 
is  precisely  the  reverse  of  what  takes  place  with  diamagnetic 
bodies,  for  there  the  centre  of  gravity  of  the  whole  mass  is  re- 
pelled; and  whatever  form  the  mass  may  have,  its  parts  take 
those  positions  which  are  most  consistent  with  the  direction  and 
degree  of  the  repulsive  force. 

All  ambiguity  and  doubt  may  be  removed  in  such  cases  as  the 
above  by  the  use  of  a  single  pole,  either  conical,  wedge-shaped 
or  round.    It  is  true,  that  if  a  wire  of  iron,  two  or  three  inches 
long,  be  placed  with  its  middle  part  near  the  apex  of  a  conical 
or  wedge-shaped  pole,  it  will  stand  at  right  angles  across  the 
axis  of  the  cone  or  wedge,  vibrating  like  a  balance-beam ;  and 
also  that  if  a  cylinder  of  bismuth,  phosphorus  or  heavy  glass  be 
placed  in  the  same  position,  it  will  take  a  similar  position.  But 
no  magnetician  who  looks  at  the  effect  can  for  a  moment  con- 
found the  phenomena ;  for  he  will  see  at  once  that  the  iron  as  a 
mass  is  attracted,  and  the  diamagnetic  is,  as  a  mass,  repelled : 
and  then,  if  for  this  observation  of  the  latter  phasnomena  he  will 
take  small  spheres  of  iron,  peroxide  of  iron,  or  solution  of 
muriate  of  iron  on  the  one  hand,  and  of  bismuth  or  phosphorus, 
copper  or  \^'ood  on  the  other,  he  will  have  the  phaenomena  in  the 
simplest  state,  and  the  fundamental  fact  will  be  before  him  ;  for 
the  magnetics  will  be  attracted,  the  diamagnetics  will  be  repelled. 

I  cannot  find  any  case  of  transverse  position  which  does  not 
enter  into  one  or  other  of  the  two  kinds  referred  to  above ;  that 
is  to  say,  which  is  not  either  a  magnetic  or  a  diamagnetic  result. 
Even  as  regards  the  effect  of  ordinary  magnetism  in  peroxide  of 
iron  and  such  hke  bodies,  I  see  no  reason  to  accept  the  statement 
of  M.  Becquerel,  that  the  distribution  of  magnetism  tends  to  take 
place  especially  in  a  transverse  direction.  Tt  appears  to  me  that 
the  destruction  of  the  continuity  of  the  mass  in  these  cases,  com- 
bined with  the  degree  of  magnetic  force  in  the  substance,  prevents 
the  transmission  of  the  force  by  induction  or  conduction  from 


Sept.  1846.]     Natural  zero — magnetic — electric. 


465 


particle  to  particle,  to  the  same  extent  as  when  the  continuity 
exists,  and  so  consecutive  poles  at  short  distances  and  in  different 
directions  are  produced ;  and  hence  the  reason  why  the  solution 
of  iron  or  nickel,  or  the  metal  platina,  does  not  behave  as  the 
peroxide  of  iron,  though  weaker  in  magnetic  force,  but  acts  as 
metallic  iron. 

If  it  had  not  been  for  the  remarkable  relation  of  a  vacuum, 
and  with  it  of  those  attenuated  forms  of  matter,  air,  gases  and 
vapours,  which  I  have  for  this  very  reason  amongst  others  in- 
sisted on  in  the  Experimental  Researches  (2432.  &c.),  it  might 
have  become  questionable  whether  those  bodies  which  I  have 
called  diaraagnetics,  were  not  acted  upon  strictly  in  the  same 
manner  as  magnetic  bodies ;  and  the  result,  whether  of  attraction 
or  repulsion,  a  consequence  of  a  difference  of  degree  only  between 
the  body  observed  and  the  medium  surrounding  it  (2438.  &c.). 
But  I  cannot  help  looking  upon  a  vacuum  as  presenting  a  zero 
point  in  the  phaenomena  of  attraction  and  repulsion;  and  as 
magnetic  bodies  are  attracted,  and  diamagnetic  bodies  repelled 
(2406.  2436.)  by  a  magnet,  when  surrounded  by  and  in  relation 
to  it,  so  I  believe  that  these  two  conditions  represent  two  anti- 
thetical forms  of  magnetic  force.  This  is  the  conclusion  I  have 
set  forth  in  my  original  papers,  and  notwithstanding  my  very 
great  respect  for  the  judgement  of  MM.  Becquerel,  it  is  that 
which  by  the  facts  I  am  encouraged  still  to  maintain'. 

'  I  take  the  liberty  in  this  note  to  refer  to  a  similar  point  in  the  philosophy 
of  static  electricity.  I  have  often  been  asked  for  the  proof  of  an  absolute 
natural  zero  between  positive  and  negative  electricity ;  and  in  reference  to 
M.  Peltier's  views,  that  the  earth  is  negative  to  the  space  around  it,  which  in 
its  turn  is  positive,  have  been  told  that  if  all  parts  of  a  portion  of  its  plane 
surface  were  equally  negative,  we  on  that  surface  could  not  tell  that  it  was 
not  in  a  zero  state.  But  such  is  not  the  case.  A  surface  which  is  truly  negative 
may  appear,  in  comparison,  to  be  positive  to  one  still  more  highly  negative  ; 
or  a  negative  surface  may  seem  to  be  in  a  zero  state  in  relation  to  two  other 
surfaces,  one  of  which  is  more  negative  and  the  other  less  so,  or  even  positive ; 
but  if  referred  to  a  true  standard  its  real  state  is  shown  at  once,  and  this  stan- 
dard is  given  by  the  inside  of  any  metallic  vessel,  from  which,  by  its  shape  or 
depth,  external  influence  is  excluded.  Such  a  vessel  always  presents  the  same 
normal  condition  within,  whatever  charge  its  external  surface  may  have ;  and 
by  comparing  the  surface  of  the  earth  with  the  inside  of  such  a  vessel,  which 
is  easily  done  by  the  use  of  carriers,  such  as  Coulomb  employed,  any  one  may 
tell  for  himself  whether  that  surface  is  in  a  negative  or  a  zero  state. 


VOL.  III. 


466  Magnetic  affection  of  light— time.    [Sept.  1846. 

When  heavy  glass  is  submitted  to  the  action  of  a  powerful 
electro-magnet,  the  maximum  degree  of  rotation  of  the  ray  is  not 
obtained  at  once,  but  requires  a  sensible  interval  of  time  (Expe- 
rimental Researches,  2170.) ;  this  I  have  attributed  to  the  gra- 
dual rising  in  intensity  of  the  force  of  the  magnet,  and  the 
corresponding  rising  of  the  effect  of  that  force  in  the  glass. 
M.  E.  Becquerel  does  not  agree  with  me  in  the  above  explana- 
tion, but  thinks  it  is  due  to  this ;  that  the  particles  of  the  dia- 
magnetic  itself  require  time  to  assume  their  new  state.  That 
they  may  require  time  is,  I  think,  very  probable.    1  do  not 
know  any  state  the  acquiring  of  which  does  not  need  time.  This 
time  is  however  most  probably  exceedingly  small  in  the  instance 
of  diamao-netic  bodies  ;  and  that  the  phaenomena  referred  to  by 
me  are  not  due  to  such  a  cause,  is,  I  think,  shown  by  two  consi- 
derations.   The  first  is,  that  the  electro-magnet  is  well  known 
by  other  kinds  of  proof,  as  the  induction  of  currents,  &c.,  to  re- 
quire time  to  develope  its  maximum  force  due  to  a  given  electric 
current.   I  have  shown  that  the  rotation  of  the  ray  must  increase 
durinc  the  time  the  magnet  is  thus  rising ;  and  I  found  that  the 
power  to  induce  currents  exists  simultaneously  with  the  in- 
creasing rotation.   The  next  consideration  is,  that  when  the  dia- 
mao-netic  is  submitted,  not  to  the  action  of  an  electro-magnet 
but'of  a  helix,  the  rotation  does  not  increase  in  the  same  gradua 
manner  as  before,  but  is  instantly  at  a  maximum  (Experimental 
Researches,  2195.) :  hence  my  reasons  for  adhermg  to  the  expla- 
nation I  gave  in  the  papers  themselves  last  year.  _ 

But  on  subjects  so  new  as  these,  differences  of  opinion  must 
inevitably  arise  upon  many  points;  and  it  is  better  for  the  in- 
quiries themselves  that  it  should  be  so,  for  the  facts  in  conse- 
quence receive  a  more  close  investigation.  I  therefore  leave 
many  points  of  difference  betw^een  myself  and  others  unnoticed 
for  the  present;  believing  that  new  and  connected  facts  will 
rapidly  accumulate,  and  that  time,  with  his  powerful  aid  will  m 
a  very  few  years  give  both  facts  and  opinions  their  right  places. 

Royal  Institution, 
August  11,  1846. 


4()7 

On  the  Diamagnetic  conditions  of  Flame  and  Gases 
To  Richard  Taylor,  Esq. 

My  dear  Sib, 
I  LATELY  received  a  paper  from  Professor  Zantedeschi,  pub- 
lished by  him,  and  containing  an  account  of  the  discovery,  by 
P.  Bancalari,  of  the  magnetism  (diamagnetism)  of  flame,  and  of 
the  further  experiments  of  Zantedeschi,  by  which  he  confirms 
the  result,  and  shows  that  flame  is  repelled  from  the  axial  line 
joining  two  magnetic  poles.  I  send  you  the  paper  that  you 
may,  if  you  estimate  its  importance  as  highly  as  I  do,  reprint 
it  in  the  Philosophical  Magazine;  and  I  send  also  with  it 
these  further  experimental  confirmations  and  extensions  of  my 
own.  As  M.  Zantedeschi  has  pubhshed  his  results,  I  have  felt 
myself  at  liberty  to  work  on  the  subject,  which  of  course  in- 
terested me  very  closely.  Probably  what  I  may  describe  wdll 
only  come  in  confirmation  of  that  which  has  been  done  already 
in  Italy  or  elsewhere ;  and  if  so,  I  hope  to  stand  excused ;  for  a 
second  witness  to  an  important  fact  is  by  no  means  superfluous, 
and  may  in  the  present  case  help  to  induce  others  to  enter  ac- 
tively into  the  new  line  of  investigation  presented  by  diamagnetic 
bodies  generally. 

I  soon  verified  the  chief  result  of  the  diamagnetic  affection  of 
flame,  and  scarcely  know  how  I  could  have  failed  to  observe  the 
effect  years  ago.  As  I  suppose  1  have  obtained  much  more 
striking  evidence  than  that  referred  to  in  Zantedeschi's  paper,  I 
will  describe  the  shape  and  arrangement  of  the  essential  parts  of 
my  apparatus.  The  electro-magnet  used  was  the  powerful  one 
described  in  the  Experimental  Researches  (2247.).  The  two 
terminal  pieces  of  iron  forming  the  virtual  magnetic  poles  were 
each  1*7  inch  square  and  six  inches  long;  but  the  ends  were 
shaped  to  a  form  approaching  that  of  a  cone,  of  which  the  sides 
have  an  angle  of  about  100°,  and  the  axis  of  which  is  horizontal 
and  in  the  upper  surface  of  the  pieces  of  iron.  The  apex  of  each 
end  was  rounded ;  nearly  a  tenth  of  an  inch  of  the  cone  being  in 
this  way  removed.    When  these  terminations  are  brought  near 

1  Philosophical  Magazine,  S.  3,  vol.  xxxi..  No.  210,  December  1847. 

2  H  2 


468  Diamagneiic  condition  of  flame.       [Dec.  1847- 

to  each  other,  they  give  a  powerful  effect  in  the  magnetic  field, 
and  the  axial  line  of  magnetic  force  is  of  course  horizontal,  and 
on  a  level  nearly  with  the  upper  surface  of  the  bars.  I  have 
found  this  form  exceedingly  advantageous  in  a  great  variety  of 
experiments. 

When  the  flame  of  a  wax  taper  was  held  near  the  axial  Hne, 
but  on  one  side  or  the  other,  about  one-third  of  the  flame  rising 
above  the  level  of  the  upper  surface  of  the  poles,  as  soon  as  the 
magnetic  force  was  on,  the  flame  was  affected ;  and  receded  from 
the  axial  line,  moving  equatorially,  until  it  took  an  inclined 
position,  as  if  a  gentle  Avind  was  causing  its  deflection  from  the 
upright  position ;  an  effect  which  ceased  the  instant  the  mag- 
netism was  removed. 

The  effect  was  not  instantaneous,  but  rose  gradually  to  a 
maximum.  It  ceased  very  quickly  when  the  magnetism  was 
removed.  The  progressive  increase  is  due  to  the  gradual  pro- 
duction of  currents  in  the  air  about  the  magnetic  field,  which 
tend  to  be,  and  are,  formed  on  the  assumption  of  the  magnetic 
conditions,  in  the  presence  of  the  flame. 

When  the  flame  was  placed  so  as  to  rise  truly  across  the  mag- 
netic axis,  the  effect  of  the  magnetism  was  to  compress  the  flame 
between  the  points  of  the  poles,  making  it  recede  in  the  direction 
of  the  axial  line  from  the  poles  towards  the  middle  transverse 
plane,  and  also  to  shorten  the  top  of  the  flame.    At  the  same 
time  the  top  and  sides  of  the  compressed  part  burnt  more 
vividly,  because  of  two  streams  of  air  which  set  in  from  the  poles 
on  each  side  directly  against  the  flame,  and  then  passed  out  with 
it  in  the  equatorial  direction.    But  there  was  at  the  same  time  a 
repulsion  or  recession  of  the  parts  of  the  flame  from  the  axial 
line ;  for  those  portions  which  were  below  did  not  ascend  so 
quickly  as  before,  and  in  ascending  they  also  passed  off  in  an 
inclined  and  equatorial  direction. 

On  raising  the  flame  a  little  more,  the  effect  of  the  magnetic 
force  was  to  increase  the  intensity  of  the  results  just  described, 
and  the  flame  actually  became  of  a  fish-tail  shape,  disposed  across 

the  magnetic  axis.  -u 

If  the  flame  was  raised  until  about  two-thirds  of  it  were  above 
the  level  of  the  axial  fine,  and  the  poles  approached  so  near  to 
each  other  (about  0-3  of  an  inch)  that  they  began  to  cool  and 
compress  the  part  of  the  flame  at  the  axial  line,  yet  without  in- 


Dec.  1847.]      P.  Bancalari — M.  Zantedeschi. 


469 


terfering  with  its  rising  freely  between  them ;  then,  on  rendering 
the  magnet  active,  the  flame  became  more  and  more  compressed 
and  shortened ;  and  as  the  effects  proceeded  to  a  maximum,  the 
top  at  last  descended,  and  the  flame  no  more  rose  between  the 
magnetic  poles,  but  spread  out  right  and  left  on  each  side  of  the 
axial  hne,  producing  a  double  flame  with  two  long  tongues. 
This  flame  was  very  bright  along  the  upper  extended  forked 
edge,  being  there  invigorated  by  a  current  of  air  which  descended 
from  between  the  poles  on  to  the  flame  at  this  part,  and  in  fact 
drove  it  away  in  the  equatorial  direction. 

When  the  magnet  was  thrown  out  of  action,  the  flame  resumed 
its  ordinary  upright  form  between  the  poles,  at  once ;  being  de- 
pressed and  redivided  again  by  the  renewal  of  the  magnetic 
action. 

When  a  small  flame,  only  about  one-third  of  an  inch  high,  was 
placed  between  the  poles,  the  magnetic  force  instantly  flattened 
it  into  an  equatorial  disc. 

If  a  ball  of  cotton  about  the  size  of  a  nut  be  bound  up  by 
wire,  soaked  in  aether  and  inQamed,  it  will  give  a  flame  six  or 
seven  inches  high.  This  large  flame  rises  freely  and  naturally 
between  the  poles ;  but  as  soon  as  the  magnet  is  rendered  active, 
it  divides  and  passes  off  in  two  flames,  the  one  on  one  side,  and 
the  other  on  the  other  side  of  the  axial  line. 

Such  therefore  is  the  general  and  very  striking  effect  which 
may  be  produced  on  a  flame  by  magnetic  action,  the  important 
discovery  of  w  hich  we  owe  to  P.  Bancalari. 

I  verified  the  results  obtained  by  M.  Zantedeschi  with  dif- 
ferent flames,  and  found  that  those  produced  by  alcohol,  sether, 
coal-gas,  hydrogen,  sulphur,  phosphorus,  and  camphor  were 
all  affected  in  the  same  manner,  though  not  apparently  with 
equal  strength.  The  brightest  flames  appeared  to  be  most 
affected. 

The  chief  results  may  be  shown  in  a  manner  in  some  respects 
still  more  striking  and  instructive  than  those  obtained  with 
flame,  by  using  a  smoking  taper.  A  taper  made  of  wax, 
coloured  green  by  verdigris,  if  suffered  to  burn  upright  for  a 
minute  and  then  blown  out,  will  usually  leave  a  wick  with  a 
spark  of  fire  on  the  top.  The  subdued  combustion  will  however 
still  go  on,  even  for  an  hour  or  more,  sending  up  a  thin  dense 
stream  of  smoke,  which,  in  a  quiet  atmosphere,  will  rise  verti- 


470  Diamagnetic  condition  of  flame.        [Dec.  1847- 

cally  for  six  or  eight  inches;  and  in  a  moving  atmosphere  will 
show  every  change  of  its  motion,  both  as  to  direction  and  mten- 
sity.    When  the  taper  is  held  beneath  the  poles,  so  that  the 
stream  of  smoke  passes  a  little  on  one  side  of  the  axial  line,  the 
stream  is  scarcely  affected  by  the  power  of  the  magnet,  the  taper 
being  three  or  four  inches  below  the  poles ;  but  if  the  taper  be 
raised,  so  that  the  coal  is  not  more  than  an  inch  below  the  axia 
Une,  the  stream  of  smoke  is  much  more  affected,  bemg  bent 
outwards ;  and  if  it  be  brought  still  higher,  there  is  a  point  at 
which  the  smoke  leaves  the  taper- wick  even  in  a  horizontal  di- 
rection, to  go  equatorially.    If  the  taper  be  held  so  that  the 
smoke- stream  passes  through  the  axial  line,  and  then  the  di- 
stances be  varied  as  before,  there  is  little  or  no  sensible  effect 
when  the  wick  is  four  inches  below :  but  being  raised,  as  soon 
as  the  warm  part  of  the  stream  is  between  the  poles,  it  tends  to 
divide ;  and  when  the  ignited  wick  is  about  an  inch  below  the 
axial  Hne,  the  smoke  rises  vertically  in  one  column  unti  about 
two-thirds  of  that  distance  is  passed  over,  and  then  it  divides, 
going  right  and  left,  leaving  the  space  between  the  poles  clear. 
Is  the  taper  is  slowly  raised,  the  division  of  the  smoke  descends, 
taking  place  lower  down,  until  it  occurs  upon  the  wick,  at  the 
distance  of  0-4  or  0-5  of  an  inch  below  the  axial  hne.    It  the 
taper  be  raised  still  more,  the  magnetic  effect  is  so  great,  as  not 
only  to  divide  the  stream,  but  to  make  it  descend  on  each  side 
of  the  ignited  wick,  producing  a  form  resembling  that  ol  the 
letter  W ;  and  at  the  same  time  the  top  of  the  burning  wick  is 
•    o-reatly  brightened  by  the  stream  of  air  that  is  impelled  down- 
wards upon  it.    In  these  experiments  the  magnetic  poles  should 
be  about  0-25  of  an  inch  apart.  ,  p 

A  burning  piece  of  amadou,  or  the  end  of  a  sphnter  of  wood, 

produced  the  same  effect. 

By  means  of  a  like  small  spark  and  stream  of  smoke  I  have 
even  rendered  evident  the  power  of  an  ordinary  magnet  The 
magnet  was  a  good  one,  and  the  poles  were  close  to  each  othei 

and  conical  in  form. 

Before  leaving  this  description  of  the  genera  phenomenon 
and  proceeding  to  a  consideration  of  the  principles  of  magnetic 
action  concerned  in  it,  I  may  say  that  a  single  pole  of  he  mag- 
net produces  similar  effects  upon  flame  and  smoke,  but  that  the) 
are  much  less  striking  and  observable. 


Dec.  1847.]         Effect  of  heat— the  currents.  471 

Though  the  effect  be  so  manifest  in  a  flame,  it  is  not,  at  first 
sight,  evident  what  is  the  chief  cause  or  causes  of  the  result. 
The  heat  of  the  flame  is  the  most  apparent  and  probable  con- 
dition ;  but  there  are  other  circumstances  which  may  be  equally 
or  more  influential.  Chemical  action  is  going  on  at  the  time  :— 
solid  matter,  which  is  known  to  be  diamagnetic,  exists  in  several 
of  the  flames  used :— and  a  great  difference  exists  between  the 
matter  of  the  flame  and  the  surrounding  air.  Now  any  or  all 
of  these  circumstances  of  temperature,  chemical  action,  soUdity 
of  part  of  the  matter,  and  differential  composition  in  respect  to 
the  surrounding  air,  may  concur  in  producing  or  influencing  the 
result. 

I  placed  the  wires  of  an  electrometer,  and  also  of  a  galvano- 
meter, in  various  parts  of  the  affected  flame,  but  could  not  pro- 
cure any  indications  of  the  evolution  of  electricity  by  any  action 
on  the  instruments. 

I  examined  the  neighbourhood  of  the  axial  line  as  to  the 
existence  of  any  current  in  the  air  when  there  was  no  flame  or 
heat  there,  using  the  visible  fumes  produced  when  little  pellets 
of  paper  dipped  in  strong  solutions  of  ammonia  and  muriatic 
acid  were  held  near  each  other ;  and  though  I  found  that  a 
stream  of  such  smoke  was  feebly  affected  by  the  magnetic 
power,  yet  I  was  satisfied  there  was  no  current  or  motion  in 
the  common  air,  as  such,  between  the  poles.  The  smoke  itself 
was  feebly  diamagnetic ;  due,  I  believe,  to  the  solid  particles 
in  it. 

But  when  flame  or  a  glowing  taper  is  used,  strong  currents 
are,  under  favourable  circumstances,  produced  in  the  air.  If 
the  flame  be  between  the  poles,  these  currents  take  their  course 
along  the  surface  of  the  poles,  which  they  leave  at  the  opposite 
faces  connected  by  the  axial  line,  and  passing  parallel  to  the 
axial  Une,  impinge  on  the  opposite  sides  of  the  flame;  and 
feeding  the  flame,  they  make  part  of  it,  and  proceed  out  equa- 
torially.    If  the  flame  be  driven  asunder  by  the  force  of  these 
currents  and  retreat,  the  currents  follow  it ;  and  so,  when  the 
flame  is  forked,  the  air  which  is  between  the  poles  forms  a  cur- 
rent which  sets  from  the  poles  downwards  and  sideways  towards 
the  flame.    I  do  not  mean  that  the  air  in  every  case  travels 
along  the  surface  of  the  poles  or  along  the  axial  lines,  or  even 
from  between  the  poles ;  for  in  the  case  of  the  glowing  taper, 


472  Diamagnetic  condition  of  flame.      [Dec.  1847. 

held  half  an  inch  or  so  beneath  the  axial  Hne,  it  is  the  cool  air 
which  is  next  nearest  to  the  taper,  and  (generally)  between  the 
taper  and  the  axial  Hne,  that  falls  with  most  force  upon  it.  In 
fact  the  movements  of  the  parts  of  the  air  and  flame  are  due  to  a 
differential  action.    We  shall  see  presently  that  the  air  is  dia- 
mao-netic  as  well  as  flame  or  hot  smoke ;  i.  e.  that  both  tend, 
according  to  the  general  law  which  I  have  expressed  in  the  Ex- 
perimental Researches  (2267-  &c.),  to  move  from  stronger  to 
weaker  places  of  magnetic  force,  but  that  hot  air  and  flame  are 
more  so  than  cold  or  cooler  air :  so,  when  flame  and  air,  or  air 
at  different  temperatures,  exist  at  the  same  time  within  a  space 
under  the  influence  of  magnetic  forces,  differing  in  intensity  of 
action,  the  hotter  particles  will  tend  to  pass  from  stronger  to 
weaker  places  of  action,  to  be  replaced  by  the  colder  particles ; 
the  former  therefore  will  have  the  effect  of  being  repelled ;  and 
the  currents  that  are  set  up  are  produced  by  this  action,  com- 
bined with  the  mechanical  force  or  current  possessed  by  the 
flame  in  its  ordinary  relation  to  the  atmosphere. 

It  will  be  evident  to  you  that  I  have  considered  flame  only  as 
a  particular  case  of  a  general  law.  It  is  a  most  important  and 
beautiful  one,  and  it  has  given  us  the  discovery  of  diamagnetism 
in  gaseous  bodies :  but  it  is  a  compHcated  one,  as  I  shall  now 
proceed  to  show,  by  analysing  some  of  its  conditions  and  sepa- 
rating their  effects. 

For  the  purpose  of  examining  the  effect  of  heat  alone  in  con- 
ducing to  the  diamagnetic  condition  of  flame,  a  small  helix  of 
fine  platina  wire  was  attached  to  two  stronger  wires  of  copper, 
so  that  the  hehx  could  be  placed  in  any  given  position  as  re- 
garded the  magnetic  poles,  and  at  the  same  time  be  ignited  at 
pleasure  by  a  voltaic  battery.  In  this  manner  it  was  substituted 
for  the  burning  taper,  and  gave  a  beautiful  highly-heated  current 
of  air,  unchanged  in  its  chemical  condition.  When  the  hehx 
was  placed  directly  under  the  axial  line,  the  hot  air  rose  up  be- 
tween the  poles  freely,  being  rendered  evident  above  by  a  ther- 
mometer, or  by  burning  the  finger,  or  even  scorching  paper ; 
but  as  soon  as  the  magnet  was  rendered  active,  the  hot  air 
divided  into  a  double  stream,  and  was  found  ascending  on  the 
two  sides  of  the  axial  line ;  but  a  descending  current  was 
formed  between  the  poles,  flowing  downwards  towards  the  hehx 
and  the  hot  air,  which  rose  and  passed  off  sideways  from  it. 


Dec.  1847.]  Effect  of  heat  on  air.  473 

It  is  therefore  perfectly  manifest  that  hot  air  is  diamagnetic 
in  relation  to,  or  more  diamagnetic  than,  cold  air ;  and,  from 
this  fact  I  concluded,  that,  by  cooling  the  air  below  the  natural 
temperature,  I  should  cause  it  to  approach  the  magnetic  axis,  or 
appear  to  be  magnetic  in  relation  to  ordinary  air.  1  had  a  little 
apparatus  made,  in  which  a  vertical  tube  delivering  air  was 
passed  through  a  vessel  containing  a  frigorific  mixture;  the 
latter  being  so  clothed  with  flannel  that  the  external  air  should 
not  be  cooled,  and  so  invade  the  whole  of  the  magnetic  field. 
The  central  current  of  cold  air  was  directed  downwards  a  little 
on  one  side  of  the  axial  line,  and  falling  into  a  tube  containing  a 
delicate  air-thermometer,  there  showed  its  effect.  On  rendering 
the  magnet  active,  this  effect  however  ceased,  and  the  thermo- 
meter rose ;  but  on  bringing  the  latter  under  the  axial  line  it 
again  fell,  showing  that  the  cold  current  of  air  had  been  drawn 
inwards  or  attracted  towards  the  axial  Une,  i.  e.  had  been  ren- 
dered magnetic  in  relation  to  air  at  common  temperatures,  or 
less  diamagnetic  than  it.  The  lower  temperature  was  0°  F. 
The  effect  was  but  small ;  still  it  was  distinct. 

The  eflfect  of  heat  upon  air,  in  so  greatly  increasing  its  dia- 
magnetic condition,  is  very  remarkable.  It  is  not,  I  think,  at 
all  probable  that  the  mere  effect  of  expanding  the  air  is  the 
cause  of  the  change  in  its  condition,  because  one  would  be  led 
to  expect  that  a  certain  bulk  of  expanded  air  would  be  less  sen- 
sible in  its  diamagnetic  effects  than  an  equal  bulk  of  denser  air; 
just  as  one  would  anticipate  that  a  vacuum  would  present  no 
magnetic  or  diamagnetic  effects  whatever,  but  be  at  the  zero 
point  between  the  two  classes  of  bodies  (Experimental  Ile- 
searches,"242.j.  2424.).  It  is  certainly  true,  that  if  the  air  were  a 
body  belonging  to  the  magnetic  class,  then  its  expansion,  being 
equivalent  to  dilution,  would  make  it  seem  diamagnetic  in  rela- 
tion to  ordinary  air  (Experimental  Researches,  2367.  2438.) ; 
but  that,  I  think,  is  not  likely  to  be  the  case,  as  will  be  seen 
by  the  results  described  further  on  in  reference  to  oxygen  and 
nitrogen. 

If  the  power  conferred  by  heat  is  a  direct  consequence,  and 
proportionate  to  the  temperature,  then  it  gives  a  very  remark- 
able character  to  gases  and  vapours,  which,  as  we  shall  see 
hereafter,  possess  it  in  common.  In  my  former  experiments 
(Experimental  Researches,  2359.  2397.)  1  heated  various  dia- 


474  Diamagnetic  condition  of  gases.       [Dec.  1847- 

magnetic  bodies,  but  could  not  perceive  that  their  degree  of 
magnetic  force  was  at  all  increased  or  affected  by  the  tempera- 
ture given  to  them.  I  have  again  submitted  small  cylinders  of 
copper  and  silver  to  the  action  of  a  single  pole,  at  common 
temperatures  and  at  a  red  heat,  with  the  same  result.  If  there 
was  any  effect  of  increased  temperature,  it  was  that  of  a  very 
slight  increase  in  the  diamagnetic  force,  but  I  am  not  sure  of 
the  result.  At  present,  therefore,  the  gaseous  and  vaporous 
bodies  seem  to  be  strikingly  distinguished  by  the  powerful  effect 
which  heat  has  in  increasing  their  diamagnetic  condition. 

As  all  the  experiments,  whether  on  flame,  smoke,  or  air, 
seemed  to  show  that  air  had  a  distinct  magnetic  relation,  which, 
though  highly  affected  by  temperature,  still  belonged  to  it  at 
all  temperatures;  so  it  was  a  probable  conclusion  that  other 
gaseous  or  vapor9us  bodies  would  be  diamagnetic  or  magnetic, 
and  that  they  would  differ  from  each  other  even  at  common  or 
equal  temperatures.  I  proceeded  therefore  to  examine  them, 
delivering  streams  of  each  into  the  air,  in  the  first  instance,  by 
fit  apparatus  and  arrangements,  and  examining  the  course  taken 
by  these  streams  in  passing  across  the  magnetic  field,  the  mag- 
netic force  being  either  induced  or  not  at  the  time. 

In  delivering  the  various  streams,  I  sometimes  introduced  the 
gases  into  a  globe  with  a  mouth  and  also  a  tubular  spout,  and 
then  poured  the  gas  out  of  the  spout,  upwards  or  downwards, 
according  as  it  was  hghter  or  heavier  than  air.    At  other  times, 
as  with  muriatic  acid  or  ammonia,  I  delivered  the  streams  from 
the  mouth  of  the  retort.    But  as  it  is  very  important  not  to 
deluge  the  m&gnetic  field  with  a  quantity  of  invisible  gas,  I  de- 
vised the  following  arrangement,  which  answered  well  for  all  the 
gases  not  soluble  in  water.    A  Woulf's  bottle  was  chosen 
having  three  apertures  at  the  top,  «,  6  and  c;  a  wide  tube  was 
fixed  into  aperture  a,  descending  within  the  bottle  to'  the 
bottom,  and  being  open  above  and  below;  by  this  any  water 
could  be  poured  into  the  bottle  and  employed  to  displace  the 
gas  previously  within  it.    Aperture  b  was  closed  by  a  stopper. 
Aperture  c  had  an  external  tube,  with  a  stop-cock  fixed  in  it  to 
conduct  the  gas  to  any  place  desired.    To  expel  the  gas  and 
send  it  forward,  a  cistern  of  water  was  placed  above  the  bottle, 
and  its  cock  so  plugged  by  a  splinter  of  wood,  that  when  full 
open  it  delivered  only  twelve  cubic  inches  of  fluid  m  a  mmute. 


Dec.  1847.]        Currents  of  gas  at  the  polei^.  475 

This  stream  of  water  being  directed  into  aperture  «,  and  the 
coek  of  tube  c  open,  twelve  cubic  inches  of  any  gas  within  the 
Woulf's  bottle  was  delivered  in  a  minute  of  time;  and  this  i 
found  an  excellent  proportion  for  our  magnet  and  apparatus 
With  respect  to  the  dehvery  of  this  gas  at  the  magnetic  poles, 

a  piece  of  glass  tube  bent  into  this  shape  ^  was  held  by  a 

clamp  on  the  stage  of  the  magnet,  so  that  it  could  easily  be 
slipped  backward  and  forward,  or  to  one  side,  and  so  its  vertical 
part  be  placed  anywhere  below  the  axial  line.    The  aperture  at 
this  end  was  about  the  one-eighth  of  an  inch  internal  diameter. 
In  the  horizontal  part  near  the  angle  was  placed  a  piece  of 
bibulous  paper,  moistened  with  strong  solution  of  muriatic  acid 
(when  necessary).    The  horizontal  part  of  the  tube  was  con- 
nected and  disconnected  in  a  moment,  when  necessary,  with  the 
tube  c  of  the  gas-bottle,  by  a  short  piece  of  vulcanized  rubber 
tube.    If  the  gas  to  be  employed  as  a  stream  were  heavier  than 
the  surrounding  medium,  then  the  glass  tube,  instead  of  having 
the  form  delineated  above,  was  so  bent  as  to  deliver  its  stream 
downwards  and  over  the  axial  line.    In  this  manner  currents  of 
difterent  gases  could  be  delivered,  perfectly  steady  and  under 
perfect  command. 

The  next  point  was  to  detect  and  trace  the  course  of  these 
streams.    A  little  ammonia  vapour,  delivered  near  the  magnetic 
field,  did  this  in  some  degree;  but  was  not  satisfactory ;  for,  in 
the  first  place,  the  little  cloud  of  muriate  of  ammonia  particles 
formed,  is  itself  diamagnetic;  and  further,  the  tranquil  condi- 
tion of  the  air  in  the  magnetic  field  was  then  too  much  dis- 
turbed.   Catch-tubes  were  therefore  arranged,  consisting  of 
tubes  of  thin  glass  about  the  size  and  length  of  a  finger,  open 
at  both  ends,  and  fixed  upon  little  stands  so  that  they  could  be 
adjusted  either  over  or  under  the  magnetic  poles  at  pleasure. 
When  they  were  over  the  poles,  I  generally  had  three  at  once ; 
one  over  the  axial  line  and  one  at  each  side.    When  they  were 
under  the  poles,  the  lower  end  was  turned  up  a  little  for  the 
purpose  of  facilitating  observation  there. 

The  gas  delivered  at  the  poles,  as  already  described,  con- 
tained a  little  muriatic  acid  (obtained  from  the  solution  in  the 
paper),  but  not  enough  to  render  it  visible.  To  make  it  mani- 
fest up  which  catch-tube  it  passed,  a  little  piece  of  bibulous 
paper,  folded  and  bound  round  and  suspended  by  a  copper  wire, 


476  Magnetic  condition  of  air — nitrogen.    [Dec.  1847- 

was  dipped  in  the  solution  of  ammonia  and  hung  in  each  of  the 

tubes.    It  was  then  evident  at  once,  by  the  visible  fume  formed 

at  the  top  of  one  of  the  tubes,  whether  the  gas  delivered  below  ^ 

passed  up  the  one  or  the  other  tube,  and  which :  and  yet  the 

gas  was  perfectly  clear  and  transparent  as  it  passed  by  the  place  ^ 

of  magnetic  action. 

In  addition  to  these  arrangements,  I  built  up  a  sheltering 
chamber  about  the  magnetic  poles  and  field,  to  preserve  the  air 
undisturbed.  This  was  about  six  inches  long  by  four  inches  in 
width  and  height,  and  was  easily  made  of  thin  plates  of  mica, 
which  were  put  together  or  taken  down  in  a  moment.  The 
chamber  was  frequently  left  more  or  less  open  at  the  top  or 
bottom  for  the  escape  of  gases,  or  the  place  of  the  catch-tubes. 
Its  advantages  were  very  great. 

jiir^  In  the  first  place  air  was  sent  in  under  these  arrange- 
ments, the  stream  being  directed  by  the  axial  hne.  It  made 
itself  visible  in  the  catch-tube  above  by  the  smoke  produced;  but 
whether  the  magnet  was  active  or  not,  its  course  was  the  same ; 
showing  that,  so  far,  the  apparatus  worked  well,  and  did  not  of 
itself  cause  any  erroneous  indications. 

Nitrogen.— i^h\s,  gas  was  sent  from  below  upwards,  and  passed 
directly  by  the  axial  line  into  the  catch-tube  above ;  but  when 
the  magnet  was  made  active,  the  stream  was  affected,  and  though 
not  stopped  in  the  middle  catch-tube,  part  appeared  in  the  side 
tubes.  The  jet  was  then  arranged  a  little  on  one  side  of  the 
axial  hne,  so  that,  without  the  magnetic  action,  it  still  ascended 
and  went  up  the  middle  catch-tube :  then,  when  the  magnetic 
action  was  brought  on,  it  was  clearly  affected,  and  a  great  por-  . 
tion  of  it  was  sent  to  the  side  catch-tube.  The  nitrogen  was, 
in  fact,  manifestly  diamagnetic  in  relation  to  common  air,  when 
both  were  at  the  same  temperature;  but  as  four-fifths  of  the  at- 
mosphere consists  of  nitrogen,  it  seemed  very  evident,  from  the 
result,  that  nitrogen  and  oxygen  must  be  very  different  trom 
each  other  in  their  magnetic  relations. 

Oxygen.— K  stream  of  oxygen  was  sent  down  through  air 
between  the  poles.  When  there  was  no  magnetic  action  it 
descended  vertically,  and  when  the  magnetic  action  was  on  it 
appeared  to  do  the  same;  at  all  events  it  did  not  pass  offequa- 
torially.  But  as  there  was  reason,  from  the  above  experiments 
with  nitrogen,  to  expect  that  oxygen  would  appear,  not  diamag- 


Dec.  1847-]   Oxygen — hydrogen — carbonic  acid,  ^c.  477 

netic  but  magnetic  in  air;  so  the  place  of  the  stream  was 
changed  and  made  to  be  on  one  side  of  the  axial  line.  In  this 
case  it  fell  perfectly  well  at  first  into  a  catch-tube  placed  be- 
neath; but  as  soon  as  the  magnet  was  rendered  active,  the 
stream  was  deflected,  being  drawn  towards  the  axial  line,  and 
fell  into  another  catch-tube  placed  there  to  receive  it.  So  oxy- 
gen appears  to  be  magnetic  in  common  air.  Whether  it  be 
really  so,  or  only  less  diamagnetic  than  air  (a  mixture  of  oxygen 
and  nitrogen),  we  shall  be  better  able  to  consider  hereafter. 

Hydrogen. — This  gas  pi'oved  to  be  clearly  and  even  strongly 
diamagnetic;  for  notwithstanding  the  powerful  ascensive  force 
which  its  stream  has  in  the  atmosphere,  because  of  its  small 
specific  gravity,  still  it  was  well  deflected  and  sent  equatorially. 
Considering  the  lightness  of  the  gas,  one  might  have^  expected 
that  it  would  have  been  drawn  towards  the  axial  line,  as  a 
stream  of  rarefied  air  (if  it  could  exist)  would  be.  Its  diamag- 
netic state,  therefore,  shows  in  a  striking  point  of  view,  that 
gases,  like  solids,  have  peculiar  and  distinctive  degrees  of  dia- 
magnetic force. 

Carbonic  acid. — This  gas  made  a  beautiful  experiment.  The 
stream  was  delivered  downwards  a  little  on  one  side  of  the  axial 
line ;  a  catch-tube  was  placed  a  little  further  out,  so  that  the 
stream  should  fall  clear  of  it  as  long  as  there  was  no  activity  in 
the  magnet.  But  on  rendering  the  magnet  efficient,  the  stream 
left  its  vertical  direction,  passed  equatorially,  and  fell  into  the 
catch-tube ;  and  by  looking  horizontally,  could  be  seen  flowing 
out  at  its  lower  extremity  like  water,  and  falling  away  through 
the  air.  Again,  the  magnet  was  thrown  out  of  action,  and  a 
glass  with  lime-water  placed  beneath  the  lower  end  of  the  catch- 
tube  ;  no  carbonic  acid  appeared  there,  though  the  fluid  in  the 
glass  was  continually  stirred  ;  but  the  instant  the  magnet  was 
excited,  the  carbonic  acid  appeared  in  the  catch-tube,  fell  into  the 
glass  and  made  the  lime-water  turbid.  This  gas  therefore  is 
diamagnetic  in  air. 

Carbonic  oxide. — This  gas  was  carefully  freed  from  carbonic 
acid  before  it  was  used.  It  was  employed  as  a  descending 
stream,  and  was  apparently  very  diamagnetic :  but  it  is  to  be 
remarked,  that  a  substance  which  is  so  nearly  the  specific  gra- 
vity of  atmospheric  air  is  easily  dispersed  right  and  left  in  it, 
and  therefore  that  the  facility  of  dispersion  is  not  a  correct 


478  Magnetic  condiiion  of  various  gases.    [Dec.  1847. 

indication  of  the  diamagnetic  force.  By  introducing  a  little 
ammonia  into  the  mica  chamber,  it  was,  however,  easily  seen 
that  carbonic  oxide  was  driven  away  equatorially  Mith  consider- 
able power;  and  I  judge  from  the  appearance,  that  it  is  more 
diamagnetic  than  carbonic  acid. 

Nitrous  oxide. — This  gas  was  moderately,  but  clearly,  dia- 
magnetic in  air.  Much  interest  belongs  to  this  and  the  other 
compounds  of  nitrogen  and  oxygen,  both  because  they  contain 
the  same  elements  as  air,  and  because  of  the  relations  of  nitroo^en 
and  oxygen  separately. 

Nitric  oxide. — I  tried  this  gas  both  as  an  up  and  down  cur- 
rent, but  could  not  determine  its  magnetic  condition.  What 
with  the  action  of  the  oxygen  of  the  air,  the  change  of  the 
nature  of  the  substances,  and  the  heat  produced,  there  was  so 
much  incidental  disturbance  and  so  little  effect  due  to  magnetic 
influence,  that  [  could  not  be  sure  of  the  result.  On  the  whole 
it  was  very  slightly  diamagnetic ;  but  so  little,  that  the  effect 
might  be  due  to  the  smoke  particles  which  served  to  render  it 
visible. 

Nitrous  acid  gas. — Difficult  to  observe,  but  I  believe  it  is 
slightly  magnetic  in  relation  to  air. 

Olefiant  gas  was  diamagnetic,  and  well  so.  The  little  differ- 
ence in  specific  gravity  of  this  gas  and  air,  even  creates  a  diffi- 
culty in  following  the  course  of  the  olefiant  gas,  unless  it  be 
watched  for  on  every  side. 

Coal-gas. — The  coal-gas  of  London  is  lighter  than  air,  being 
only  about  two-thirds  in  weight  of  the  latter.  It  is  very  well 
diamagnetic,  and  gives  exceedingly  good  and  distinct  results. 

Sulphui'ous  acid  gas  is  diamagnetic  in  air.  It  was  generated 
in  a  small  tube  containing  liquid  sulphurous  acid;  this  being 
connected,  in  place  of  the  gas  bottle,  with  the  delivery-tube  and 
mouthpiece  by  the  vulcanized  rubber  tube.  The  presence  or 
absence  of  the  gas  in  the  catch-tube  was  well  shown  by  ammo- 
nia, and  still  better  by  litmus  paper. 

Muriatic  acid. — The  retort  in  which  it  was  generated  was 
connected,,  as  just  described,  with  the  dehvery-tube.  The  gas 
was  very  decidedly  diamagnetic  in  air. 

Hydrnodic  acid  was  also  diamagnetic  in  air.  When  there 
was  an  abundant  stream  of  gas,  its  entrance  into  and  passage 
through  the  side  catch  tube,  on  rendering  the  magnet  active. 


Dec.  1847.]  Ammonia— iodine  and  bromine  vapour.  479 

^Yas  very  striking.  When  there  was  less  gas,  the  stream  was 
dispersed  equatorially  in  all  directions,  and  less  entered  the 
tube. 

Fluo-silicon. — Diamagnetic  in  air. 

Ammonia. — This  gas  was  evolved  from  materials  in  a  retort, 
and  tested  in  the  catch-tube  above  by  muriatic  acid  in  the 
paper.  It  was  well  diamagnetic,  corresponding  in  this  respect 
with  the  character  of  its  elements.  It  could  also  be  very  well 
indicated  by  reddened  litmus  paper  held  over  the  tubes. 

Chlorine  was  sent  from  the  Woulf's  bottle  apparatus,  and 
proved  to  be  decidedly  diamagnetic  in  air.  Either  ammonia  by 
its  fumes,  or  litmus  paper  by  its  becoming  bleached,  served  to 
indicate  the  entrance  of  the  chlorine  into  the  side  catch-tube 
every  time  the  magnet  was  rendered  active. 

Iodine. — A  piece  of  glass  tube  was  so  shaped  at  its  lower  ex- 
tremity as  to  form  a  chamber  for  the  reception  of  iodine,  which 
chamber  had  a  prolonged  mouth  directed  downwards  so  as  to 
deliver  the  vapour  formed  within.  On  putting  a  little  iodine 
into  the  chamber,  then  heating  it,  and  especially  the  mouth 
part,  by  a  spirit-lamp,  and  afterwards  inclining  the  apparatus, 
abundance  of  the  vapour  of  iodine  was  generated  as  the  sub- 
stance flowed  on  to  the  hotter  parts,  and  passed  in  a  good  stream 
from  the  mouth  downwards.  This  purple  stream  was  diamag- 
netic in  air,  and  could  be  seen  flowing  right  and  left  from  the 
axial  line,  when  not  too  dense.  If  very  dense  and  heavy,  its 
gi'avity  was  such  as  to  make  it  break  through  the  axial  line, 
notwithstanding  the  action  of  the  magnet ;  still  it  was  manifest 
that  iodine  is  diamagnetic  to  air. 

Bromine. — A  little  bromine  was  put  into  the  horizontal  part 
of  the  delivery-tube,  and  then  air  passed  over  it  by  the  apparatus 
already  described.  So  much  bromine  rose  into  vapour  as  to 
make  the  air  of  a  yellow  colour,  and  caused  it  to  fall  well  in  a 
stream  by  the  axial  line.  A  little  ammonia  delivered  near  the 
magnetic  field  showed  that  this  stream  was  diamagnetic,  and 
hence  it  may  fairly  be  presumed  that  the  pure  vapour  of  bromine 
would  be  diamagnetic  also. 

Cyanogen. — Strongly  diamagnetic  in  air. 

Taking  air  as  the  standard  of  comparison,  it  is  very  striking 
to  observe,  that  much  as  gases  appear  to  differ  one  from  another 
in  the  degree  of  their  diamagnetic  condition,  there  are  very  few 


480  Magnetic  condition  of  air  and  qases.    [Dec.  1847. 

that  are  not  more  diamagnetic  than  it ;  and  when  the  investiga- 
tion is  carried  forward  into  the  relation  of  the  two  chief  consti- 
tuents of  air,  oxygen  and  nitrogen,  it  is  still  more  striking  to 
observe  the  very  low  condition  of  oxygen,  which,  in  fact,  is  the 
cause  of  the  comparatively  low  condition  of  air.  Of  all  the  va- 
pours and  gases  yet  tried,  oxygen  seems  to  be  that  which  has 
the  least  diamagnetic  force.  It  is  as  yet  a  question  where  it 
stands ;  for  it  may  be  as  low  as  a  vacuum,  or  may  even  pass  to 
the  magnetic  side  of  it,  and  experiment  does  not  as  yet  give  an 
answer  to  the  question.  I  believe  it  to  be  diamagnetic;  and 
this  belief  is  strengthened  by  the  action  of  heat  upon  it,  to  be 
described  hereafter ;  but  it  is  exceedingly  low  in  the  scale,  and 
far  below  chlorine,  iodine,  and  such  like  bodies. 

All  the  compounds  of  oxygen  and  nitrogen  seem  to  show  the 
influence  of  the  presence  of  the  oxygen.  Nitrous  acid  seems  to 
be  less  diamagnetic  than  air.  Nitric  oxide  mingled  with  nitrous 
acid  and  warm,  is  about  as  air.  Nitrous  oxide  is  clearly  dia- 
magnetic in  air,  though  it  contains  more  oxygen :  but  it  also 
contains  more  nitrogen  than  air,  and  is  also  denser  than  it,  so 
that  there  is  more  matter  present;  still  I  think  the  results  are 
in  favour  of  the  idea  that  oxygen  is  diamagnetic.  By  referring 
to  the  relation  of  carbonic  oxide  to  carbonic  acid,  described 
further  on,  it  will  be  seen  that  the  addition  of  oxygen  seems  to 
make  a  body  less  diamagnetic.  But  the  truth  may  be,  not  that 
oxygen  is  really  magnetic,  but  that  a  compound  body  possesses 
a  specific  diamagnetic  force,  which  is  not  the  sum  of  the  forces 
of  its  particles. 

It  is  very  difficult  to  form  more  than  a  mere  guess  at  the  re- 
lative degree  of  diamagnetic  force  possessed  by  different  gaseous 
bodies  when  they  are  examined  only  in  air,  because  of  the  many 
circumstances  which  tend  to  confuse  the  results.  First,  there 
is  the  invisibility  of  the  gas  which  deprives  us  of  the  power  of 
adjusting  by  sight  so  as  to  obtain  the  best  effect :  then,  there  is 
the  difference  of  gravity ;  for  if  a  gas  ascend  or  descend  in  a 
rapid  stream,  it  may  seem  less  deflected  than  another  flowing 
more  slowly,  though  it  be  more  diamagnetic ;  and  as  to  gases 
nearly  of  the  specific  gravity  of  air,  whether  more  or  less  dia- 
magnetic, they  are  almost  entirely  dispersed  in  different  direc- 
tions, 80  that  little  only  enters  the  catch-tube.  Another 
modifying  circumstance  is  the  distance  of  the  aperture  deliver- 


Dec.  1847.]      Different  gases  in  carbonic  acid. 


481 


ing  gas  from  the  axial  line,  which,  to  obtain  the  maximum 
effect,  ought  to  vary  with  the  gravity  of  the  gases  and  their  dia- 
magnetic  force.  Again,  it  is  important  that  the  magnetic  field 
be  not  filled  with  the  gas  to  be  examined,  and  that  generally 
speaking  only  a  moderate  stream  be  employed;  which  however 
must  depend  again  upon  the  specific  gravity. 

The  only  correct  way  therefore  of  comparing  two  gases  to- 
gether is  to  experiment  with  them  one  in  the  other.  For  the 
experiments  made  with  gases,  in  gases  or  in  air,  are  differential, 
and  similar  in  their  nature  with  those  made  on  a  former  occasion 
with  solutions  (Experimental  Researches,  2362.  &c.) ;  I  there- 
fore changed  the  surrounding  medium  in  a  few  experiments, 
substituting  other  gases  for  air ;  and  first  selected  carbonic  acid 
as  a  body  easy  to  experiment  with,  and  one  that  would,  pro- 
bably, be  more  powerfully  than  some  other  of  the  gases,  dia- 
magnetic  (I  speak  as  to  the  appearances  or  relative  results  only) 
in  air. 

I  constructed  a  kind  of  tray  or  box,  by  folding  up  a 
doubled  sheet  of  waxed  paper;  thus  making  a  vessel  13  inches 
long,  5  inches  wide,  and  5  inches  high.  This  was  placed  on 
the  ends  of  the  great  magnet,  and  the  terminal  pieces  of  iron 
before  described,  placed  in  it.  The  box  was  covered  over 
loosely  by  plates  of  mica,  and  formed  a  long  square  chamber  in 
which  were  contained  the  magnetic  poles  and  field.  All  the 
former  arrangements  in  respect  of  the  magnetic  field,  the 
delivery-tube,  the  catch-tubes,  &c.,  were  then  made ;  and  lastly, 
the  box  was  filled  with  carbonic  acid  by  a  tube,  which  entered  it 
at  one  corner ;  and  m  as,  from  time  to  time,  supplied  with  a  fresh 
portion  of  gas,  as  the  previous  contents  became  diluted  with 
gases  or  air.  Everything  answered  perfectly,  and  the  following 
results  were  easily  obtained. 

Air  passed  axially,  being  less  diamagnetic  than  carbonic  acid 
gas. 

Oxygen  passed  to  the  magnetic  axis,  as  was  to  be  expected. 

Nitrogen  M-ent  equatorially,  being  therefore  (Jiamagnetic,  even 
in  carbonic  acid. 

Hydrogen,  coal-gas,  olefiant  gas,  muriatic  acid  and  ammonia 
passed  equatorially  in  carbonic  acid,  and  were  fairly  diamagnetic 
in  relation  to  it. 

Carbonic  oxide  was  very  fairly  diamagnetic  in  carbonic  acid 

VOL.  III.  Q  - 


482  Magnetic  condition  of  air  and  gases.    [Dec.  1847. 

gas.  Here  the  effect  of  oxygen  seems  to  be  very  well  illustrated. 
Equal  volumes  of  carbonic  oxide  and  carbonic  acid  contain  equal 
quantities  of  carbon  ;  but  the  former  contains  only  half  as  much 
oxygen  as  the  latter.  Yet  it  is  more  diamagnetic  than  the  latter ; 
so,  that,  though  an  additional  volume  and  quantity  of  oxygen, 
equal  to  that  in  the  carbonic  oxide,  is  in  the  carbonic  acid  added 
and  compressed  into  it,  it  does  not  add  to,  but  actually  takes 
from,  the  diamagnetic  force. 

Nitrous  oxide  appears  to  be  slightly  diamagnetic  in  relation  to 
carbonic  acid ;  but  nitric  oxide  gas  was  in  the  contrary  relation 
and  passed  towards  the  axial  line. 

Hence  it  seems  that  carbonic  acid,  though  more  diamagnetic 
than  air,  is  not  far  removed  from  it  in  that  respect ;  and  this 
position  it  probably  holds  because  of  the  quantity  of  oxygen  in 
it.  The  apparent  place  of  nitrous  oxide  close  to  it  appears,  in  a 
great  measure,  to  depend  on  the  same  circumstance  of  oxygen 
entering  largely  into  its  composition.  Still  it  is  manifest  that 
the  action  is  not  directly  as  the  oxygen,  for  then  common  air 
would  be  more  diamagnetic  than  either  of  them.  It  seems 
rather  that  the  forces  are  modified,  as  in  the  cases  also  of  iron 
and  oxygen,  and  that  each  compound  body  has  its  peculiar  but 
constant  intensity  of  action. 

In  order  to  make  similar  experiments  in  light  gases,  the  two 
terminal  pieces  of  the  magnet  were  raised,  so  that  they  might  be 
covered  by  a  French  glass  shade,  which,  with  its  stand,  made  a 
very  good  chamber  about  them.  The  pipe  to  supply  and 
change  the  gaseous  medium,  and  also  that  for  bringing  the  gas 
under  trial  as  a  stream  into  the  magnetic  field,  passed  through 
holes  made  in  the  bottom  of  the  stand.  The  different  gases  to 
be  compared  with  those  employed  as  media,  were,  except  in  the 
cases  of  ammonia  and  chlorine,  mingled  with  a  trace  of  muriatic 
acid,  as  before  described.  The  gaseous  media  used  were  two, 
coal-gas  and  hydrogen.  Whilst  using  coal-gas,  I  observed  the 
direction  of  the  currents  of  the  other  gases  in  it  by  bringing  a 
little  piece  of  paper,  at  the  end  of  a  wire  and  dipped  in  am- 
monia solution,  near  the  stream.  In  the  case  of  the  hydrogen, 
I  diffused  a  little  ammonia  through  the  whole  of  the  gas  in  the 
first  instance. 

Air  passed  towards  the  axial  line  in  coal-gas,  but  was  not 
much  affected. 


Dec.  I847.]         Different  gases  in  hydrogen. 


483 


Oxygen  had  the  appearance  of  being  strongly  magnetic  in 
coal-gas,  passing  with  great  impetuosity  to  the  magnetic  axis, 
and  clinging  about  it ;  and  if  much  muriate  of  ammonia  fume 
were  purposely  formed  at  the  time,  it  was  carried  by  the  oxygen 
to  the  magnetic  field  with  such  force  as  to  hide  the  ends  of  the 
magnetic  poles.  If  then  the  magnetic  action  were  suspended 
for  a  moment,  this  cloud  descended  by  its  gravity ;  but  being 
quite  below  the  poles,  if  the  magnet  were  again  rendered  active, 
the  oxygen  cloud  immediately  started  up  and  took  its  former 
place.  The  attraction  of  iron  filings  to  a  magnetic  pole  is  not 
more  striking  than  the  appearance  presented  by  the  oxygen 
under  these  cii'cumstances. 

Nitrogen. — Clearly  diamagnetic  in  coal-gas. 
Olefiant,  carbonic  oxide,  and  carbonic  acid  gases  were  all 
slightly,  but  more  or  less  diamagnetic  in  the  coal-gas. 

On  substituting  hydrogen  as  the  surrounding  medium  in 
place  of  coal-gas,  more  care  was  taken  in  the  experiments. 
Each  gas  experimented  upon  was  tried  in  it  twice  at  least; 
first  in  the  hydrogen  of  a  previous  experiment,  and  then  in  a 
new  atmosphere  of  hydrogen. 

Air.—A\Y  passes  axially  in  hydrogen  when  there  is  very  little 
smoke  in  it :  when  there  is  much  smoke  in  the  stream  the  latter 
is  either  indifferent  or  tends  to  pass  equatorially.    I  believe  that 
air  and  hydrogen  cannot  be  far  from  each  other. 
Nitrogen  is  strikingly  diamagnetic  in  hydrogen. 
Oxygen  is  as  strikingly  magnetic  in  relation  to  hydrogen.  It 
presented  the  appearances  already  described  as  occurring  in  coal- 
gas  ;  but  as  the  jet  delivered  the  descending  stream  of  oxygen  a 
little  on  one  side  of  the  axial  line,  its  centrifugal  power,  in  rela- 
tion to  the  axial  line,  was  so  balanced  by  the  centripetal  power 
produced  by  the  magnetic  action,  that  the  stream  at  first  revolved 
in  a  regular  ring  round  the  axial  line,  and  produced  a  cloud 
that  continued  to  spin  round  it  as  long  as  the  magnetic  force  was 
continued,  but  fell  down  to  the  bottom  of  the  chamber  when  that 
force  was  removed. 

Nitrous  oxide.— gas  was  clearly  diamagnetic  in  the  hy- 
drogen, and  gave  rise  to  a  very  beautiful  result  in  consequence 
of  Its  following  the  oxygen;  for  at  the  beginning  of  the  experi- 
ment, the  httle  oxygen  contained  in  the  conducting  tube  passed 
axially ;  but  the  instant  that  was  expelled,  and  the  nitrous  oxide 

2  I  2 


484 


Magnetic  condition  of  air  and  gases.    [Dec.  1847. 


issued  forth,  the  stream  changed  its  direction,  and  passed  off 
diamagnetically  in  the  most  striking  manner. 

Nitric  owide. — This  gas  passed  axially  in  hydrogen,  and  there- 
fore is  magnetic  in  relation  to  it. 

Ammonia. — Diamagnetic  in  hydrogen. 

Carbonic  oxide,  carbonic  acid,  and  olefiant  gases  were  diamag- 
netic in  hydrogen ;  the  last  most  so,  and  the  carbonic  acid  ap- 
parently the  least. 

Chlorine  was  slightly  diamagnetic  in  hydrogen.  It  was 
clearly  so ;  but  the  cloudy  particles  might  conduce  much  to 
the  small  effect  produced. 

Muriatic  acid  gas. — I  think  it  was  a  little  diamagnetic  in  the 
hydrogen. 

Notwithstanding  the  many  disturbing  causes  which  interfere 
with  first  and  hasty  experiments  of  this  kind,  and  produce  re- 
sults which  occasionally  cross  and  contradict  each  other,  still 
there  are  some  very  striking  considerations  which  arise  in  com- 
paring the  gases  with  each  other  at  the  same  temperature. 
Foremost  amongst  these  is  the  place  of  oxygen ;  for  of  all  the 
gaseous  bodies  yet  tried  it  is  the  least  diamagnetic,  and  seems  in 
this  respect  to  stand  far  apart  from  the  rest  of  them.  The  con- 
dition of  nitrogen,  as  being  highly  diamagnetic,  is  also  important. 
The  place  of  hydrogen,  as  being  less  diamagnetic  than  nitrogen, 
and  of  chlorine,  which,  instead  of  approaching  to  oxygen,  is 
above  hydrogen,  and  also  of  iodine,  which  is  probably  far  above 
chlorine,  are  marked  circumstances. 

Air  of  course  owes  its  place  to  the  proportion  and  the  indivi- 
dual diamagnetic  character  of  the  oxygen  and  nitrogen  in  it. 
The  great  difference  existing  between  these  two  bodies  in  re- 
spect of  magnetic  relation,  and  the  striking  effect  presented  by 
oxygen  in  coal-gas  and  hydrogen,  bodies  not  far  removed  from 
nitrogen  in  diamagnetic  force,  made  me  think  it  might  not  be 
impossible  to  separate  air  into  its  two  chief  constituents  by 
magnetic  force  alone.  I  made  an  experiment  for  this  purpose, 
but  did  not  succeed ;  but  I  am  not  convinced  that  it  cannot  be 
done.  For  since  we  can  actually  distinguish  certain  gases,  and 
especially  these  two  by  their  magnetic  properties,  it  does  not 
seem  impossible  that  sufficient  power  might  cause  their  sepa- 
ration from  a  state  of  mixture. 

In  the  course  of  these  experiments  I  subjected  several  of  the 


Dec.  I847.]      Liferent  gases  healed— oxygen. 


485 


gases  to  heat,  to  ascertain  whether  they  generally  underwent  the 
same  exaltation  of  their  diamagnctic  power  which  occurred  with 
common  air  (2854.).  For  this  purpose  a  helix  of  platina  wire  was 
placed  in  the  mouth  of  the  delivering  tube,  which  itself  was  placed 
below  the  magnetic  axis  between  the  poles.  The  helix  could  be 
raised  to  any  temperature  by  a  little  voltaic  battery,  and  any  gas 
could  be  sent  through  it  and  upwai'ds  across  the  magnetic  field 
by  means  of  the  WoulPs  bottle  apparatus  already  described.  It 
M'as  easy  to  ascertain  whether  the  gas  went  directly  up  between 
the  poles,  or,  when  the  magnet  was  active,  left  that  direction  and 
formed  two  equatorial  side- streams,  either  by  the  sensation  on 
the  finger,  or  by  a  thermoscope  formed  of  a  spiral  compound 
lamina  of  platinum  and  silver  placed  in  a  tube  above.  In  every 
case  the  hot  gas  was  diamagnetic  in  the  air,  and  I  think  far  more 
so  than  if  the  gas  had  been  at  common  temperatures.  The 
gases  tried  were  as  follows  :  oxygen,  nitrogen,  hydrogen,  nitrous 
oxide,  carbonic  acid,  muriatic  acid,  ammonia,  coal-gas,  ole- 
fiant  gas. 

But  as  in  these  experiments  the  surrounding  air  would,  of 
necessity,  mingle  with  the  gas  first  heated,  and  so  form,  in  fact, 
a  part  of  the  heated  stream,  I  arranged  the  platinum  helix  so 
that  I  could  heat  it  in  a  given  gas,  and  thus  compare  the  same 
gas  at  different  temperatures  with  itself. 

A  stream  of  hot  oxygen  in  cold  oxygen  was  powerfully  dia- 
magnetic. The  effect  and  its  degree  may  be  judged  of  by  the 
following  circumstances.  When  the  platinum  helix  below  the 
axial  line  was  ignited,  the  effect  of  heat  on  the  indicating  com- 
pound spiral,  placed  in  a  tube  over  the  axial  line,  was  such  as 
to  cause  its  lower  extremity  to  pass  through  one  and  a  half  re- 
volutions, or  540°:  when  the  magnetic  force  was  rendered  active, 
the  spiral  returned  through  all  these  degrees  to  its  first  position, 
as  if  the  ignited  helix  below  had  been  lowered  to  the  common 
temperature  or  taken  away ;  and  yet  in  respect  of  it,  nothing 
had  been  changed.  On  rendering  the  magnet  inactive,  the  cur- 
rent of  hot  oxygen  instantly  resumed  its  perpendicular  course 
and  affected  the  thermoscope  as  before. 

On  experimenting  with  carbonic  acid,  it  was  found  that  hot 
carbonic  acid  was  diamagnetic  to  cold  carbonic  acid ;  and  the 
effects  were  apparently  as  great  in  amount  as  in  oxygen. 

On  making  the  same  arrangement  in  hydrogen,  I  failed  to 


486  Magnetic  condition  of  air  and  gases.    [Dec.  1847- 

obtain  any  result  regarding  the  relation  of  the  hot  and  cold  gas, 
for  this  reason  :— that  I  could  not,  in  any  case,  either  with  or 
without  the  magnetic  action,  obtain  any  signs  of  heat  on  the 
thermoscopic  spiral  above,  even  when  the  platinum  helix,  not 
more  than  an  inch  below  it,  was  nearly  white  hot.  This  effect 
is,  I  think,  greatly  dependent  upon  the  rapidity  with  which  hy- 
drogen is  heated  and  cooled  in  comparison  with  other  gases,  and 
also  upon  the  vicinity  of  the  cold  masses  of  iron  forming  the 
magnetic  poles,  between  which  the  hot  gas  has  to  pass  in  its  way 
upwards  :  and  it  is  most  probably  connected  with  the  fact  ob- 
served by  Mr.  Grove  of  the  difficulty  of  igniting  a  platinum  wire 

in  hydrogen.  '  ,         c  a 

When  the  igniting  helix  was  placed  in  coal-gas,  it  was  found 
that  the  hot  gas  was  diamagnetic  to  that  which  was  cold;  as 
in  all  the  other  cases.  Here,  again,  an  effect  like  that  which 
was  observed  in  hydrogen  occurred ;  for  when  there  was  no  mag- 
netic action,  the  -ascending  stream  of  hot  coal-gas  could  cause 
the  thermoscopic  spiral  to  revolve  through  only  280°  or  300°, 
in  place  of  above  540° ;  through  which  it  could  pass  when  the 
surrounding  gas  was  oxygen,  air,  or  carbonic  acid ;  and  that  even 
when  the  helix  was  at  a  higher  temperature  in  the  coal-gas  than 
in  any  of  these  gases. 

The  proof  is  clear  then  that  oxygen,  carbonic  acid,  and  coai- 
gas,  are  more  diamagnetic  hot  than  cold.  The  same  is  the  case 
with  air ;  and  as  air  consists  of  four-fifths  nitrogen  and  only  one- 
fifth  oxygen,  and  yet  shows  an  effect  of  this  kind  as  strongly 
as  oxygen,  it  is  manifest  that  nitrogen  also  has  the  same  relation 

when  hot  and  cold.  ,  ^  -i^ 

Of  the  other  gases  also  I  have  no  doubt;  though  to  be  quite 
certain,  they  ought  to  be  tried  in  atmospheres  of  their  own  sub- 
stance (2854.),  or  else  in  gases  more  diamagnetic  at  common  tem- 
peratures than  they.  The  olefiant  and  coal-gases  in  air  easdy  bo  e 
the  elevation  of  the  hehx  to  a  full  red  heat,  -^tbout  mflam mg 
when  out  of  the  exit-tube  :  the  hydrogen  required  that  the  helix 
should  be  at  a  lower  temperature.  Muriatic  acid  and  a— 
showed  the  division  of  the  one  stream  mto  two,  very  beautifully, 
on  holding  blue  and  red  litmus  paper  above. 

There  is  another  mode  of  observing  the  diamagnetic  condition 
of  flame,  and  experimenting  with  the  various  gases,  which  is 
sometimes  useful,  and  should  always  be  understood,  lest  it  inad- 


Dec.  1847.] 


Pierced  poles— flames. 


487 


vertently  might  lead  to  confusion.  I  have  a  pair  of  terminal 
magnetic  poles  which  are  pierced  in  a  horizontal  direction,  that 
a  ray  of  light  may  pass  through  them.  The  opposed  faces  of 
these  vei'tical  poles  are  not,  as  in  the  former  case,  the  rounded 
ends  of  cones;  but,  though  rounded  at  the  edges,  may  be  con- 
sidered as  flat  over  an  extent  of  surface  an  inch  in  diameter.  The 
pierced  passages  are  in  the  form  of  cones,  the  truncation  of 
which  in  this  flat  surface  is  rather  more  than  half  an  inch  in  dia- 
meter. When  these  poles  were  in  their  place,  and  from  0*3 
to  0*4  of  an  inch  apart,  a  taper  flame,  burning  freely  between 
them,  was  for  a  few  moments  unaffected  by  throwing  the  mag- 
net into  action ;  but  then  it  suddenly  changed  its  form,  and  ex- 
tending itself  axially,  threw  off  two  horizontal  tongues,  which 
entered  the  passages  in  the  poles ;  and  thus  it  continued  as  long 
as  the  magnetism  continued,  and  no  part  of  it  passed  equa- 
torially. 

On  using  a  large  flame  made  with  the  cotton  ball  and  aether, 
two  arms  could  be  thrown  off  from  the  flame  by  the  force  of  the 
magnetism,  which  passed  in  an  equatorial  direction,  as  before ; 
and  other  two  parts  entered  the  passages  in  the  magnetic  poles, 
and  actually  issued  out  occasionally  at  their  further  extremities. 

When  the  poles  were  about  0-25  of  an  inch  apart,  and  the 
smoking  taper  was  placed  in  the  middle  between  them  level  with 
the  centres  of  the  passages,  the  effect  was  very  good;  for  the 
smoke  passed  axially  and  issued  out  at  the  further  ends  of  the 
pole  passages. 

Coal-gas  delivered  in  the  same  place  also  passed  axially,  i.  e. 
into  the  pole  passages  and  parallel  to  the  line  joining  them. 

A  little  consideration  easily  leads  to  the  true  cause  of  these 
effects,  and  shows  that  they  are  not  inconsistent  with  the  former 
results.  The  law  of  all  these  actions  is,  that  if  a  particle,  placed 
amongst  other  particles,  be  more  diamagnetic  (or  less  magnetic) 
than  they,  and  free  to  move,  it  will  go  from  strong  to  weaker 
places  of  magnetic  action ;  also,  that  particles  less  diamagnetic 
will  go  from  weaker  to  stronger  places  of  action.  Now  with  the 
poles  just  described,  the  line  or  lines  of  maximum  force  are  not 
coincident  with  the  axis  of  the  holes  pierced  in  the  poles,  but  lie 
m  a  circle  having  a  diameter,  probably,  a  little  larger  than  the 
diameter  of  the  holes ;  and  the  hues  within  that  circle  will  be  of 
lesser  power,  diminishing  in  force  towards  the  centre.    A  hot 


488  Magnetic  condition  of  air  and  gases.    [Dec.  1847. 

particle  therefore  within  that  circle  will  be  driven  inwards,  and 
being  urged  by  successive  portions  of  matter  driven  also  inwards, 
will  find  its  way  out  at  the  other  ends  of  the  passages,  and  there- 
fore seem  to  go  in  an  axial  direction ;  whilst  a  hot  particle  outside 
of  that  circle  of  Unes  of  maximum  force  will  be  driven  outwards, 
and  so,  with  others,  will  form  the  two  tongues  of  flame  which 
pass  off  in  the  equatorial  direction.  By  bringing  the  glowing 
taper  to  different  parts,  the  circle  of  lines  of  maximum  magnetic 
intensity  can  be  very  beautifully  traced ;  and  by  placing  the  taper 
inside  or  outside  of  that  circle,  the  smoke  could  be  made  to  pass 
axially  or  equatorially  at  pleasure. 

I  arranged  an  apparatus  on  this  principle  for  trying  the  gases, 
but  did  not  find  it  better  than,  or  so  good  as,  the  one  I  have 
described. 

Such  are  the  results  I  have  obtained  in  verifying  and  extending 
the  discovery  made  by  P.  Bancalari.  I  would  have  pursued 
them  much  further,  but  my  present  state  of  health  will  not  per- 
mit it :  1  therefore  send  them  to  you  with,  probably,  many  imper- 
fections. It  is  now  almost  proved  that  many  gaseous  bodies  are 
diamagnetic  in  their  relations,  and  probably  all  will  be  found  to 
be  so.  I  say  almost  proved ;  for  it  is  not,  as  yet,  proved  in  fact. 
That  many,  and  most,  gaseous  bodies  are  subject  to  magnetic 
force  is  proved ;  but  the  zero  is  not  yet  distinguished.  ^  Now, 
until  it  is  distinguished,  we  cannot  tell  which  gaseous  bodies  will 
rank  as  diamagnetic  and  which  as  magnetic ;  and  also,  whether 
there  may  not  be  some  standing  at  zero.  There  is  evidently  no 
natural  impossibility  to  some  gases  or  vapours  being  magnetic, 
or  that  some  should  be  neither  magnetic  nor  diamagnetic.  It  is 
the  province  of  experiment  to  decide  such  points  ;  and  the  affirm- 
ative or  negative  may  not  be  asserted  before  such  proof  is  given, 
though  it  may,  very  philosophically,  be  believed. 

For  myself  1  have  always  believed  that  the  zero  was  repre- 
sented by  a  vacuum,  and  that  no  body  really  stood  with  it.  But 
though  I  have  only  guarded  myself  from  asserting  more  than 
I  knew,  Zantedeschi  (and  1  think  also  De  la  Rive),  with  some 
others,  seem  to  think  that  I  have  asserted  the  gases  are  not  sub- 
ject to  magnetic  action ;  whereas  1  only  wished  to  say  that  I 
could  not  find  that  they  were,  and  perhaps  were  not  :  I  will 
therefore  quote  a  few  of  my  words  from  the  Experimental  Re- 
searches.   Speaking  of  the  preparation  of  a  liquid  medium  at 


Dec.  1847.]         True  zero— gases  and  light.  489 

zero,  I  say,  "Thus  o. fluid  medium  was  obtained,  which  practi- 
cally, as  far  as  I  could  perceive,  had  every  magnetic  character 
and  effect  of  a  gas,  and  even  of  a  vacuum,  &c."— Experimental 
Researches,  2423.  Again,  at  (2433.)  I  say,  "At  one  time  I  looked 
to  air  and  gases  as  the  bodies  which,  allowing  attenuation  of 
their  substance  without  addition,  would  permit  of  the  obser- 
vation of  corresponding  variations  in  their  magnetic  proper- 
ties, but  now  all  such  power  by  rarefaction  appears  to  be  taken 
away."  And  further  down  at  (2435.),  "Whether  the  negative 
results  obtained  by  the  use  of  gases  and  vapours  depend  upon 
the  smaller  quantity  of  matter  in  a  given  volume,  or  whether 
they  are  the  direct  consequences  of  the  altered  physical  condition 
of  the  substance,  is  a  point  of  very  great  importance  to  the 
theory  of  magnetism.  I  have  imagined  in  elucidation  of  the 
subject  an  experiment,  &c.,  but  expect  to  find  great  diffi- 
culty in  carrying  it  into  execution,  &c."  Happily  P.  Bancalari's 
discovery  has  now  settled  this  matter  for  us  in  a  most  satisfac- 
tory manner.  But  where  the  true  zero  is,  or  that  every  body  is 
more  or  less  removed  from  it  on  one  side  or  the  other,  is  not,  as 
yet,  experimentally  shown  or  proved. 

1  cannot  conclude  this  letter  without  expressing  a  hope  that 
since  gases  are  shown  to  be  magnetically  affected,  they  will  also 
shortly  be  found,  when  under  magnetic  influence,  to  have  the 
power  of  affecting  light  (Experimental  Researches,  2186.  2212.). 
Neither  can  I  refrain  from  signalizing  the  very  remarkable 
and  direct  relation  between  the  forces  of  heat  and  magnetism 
which  is  presented  in  the  experiments  on  flame,  and  heated  air 
and  gases.  I  did  not  find  on  a  former  occasion  (Experimental 
Researches,  2397.)  that  solid  diamagnetic  bodies  were  sensibly 
affected  by  heat,  but  shall  repeat  the  experiments  and  make  more 
extensive  ones,  if  the  Italian  philosophers  have  not  already  done 
so.  In  reference  to  the  effect  upon  the  diamagnetic  gases,  it 
mayHbe  observed,  that,  speaking  generally,  it  is  in  the  same  di- 
rection as  that  of  heat  \ipon  iron,  nickel  and  cobalt;  i.  e.  heat 
tends  in  the  two  sets  of  cases,  either  to  the  diminution  of  maff- 
netic  force,  or  the  increase  of  diamagnetic  force ;  but  the  results 
are  too  few  to  allow  of  any  general  conclusion  as  yet. 

As  air  at  different  temperatures  has  different  diamagnetic  re- 
lations, and  as  the  atmosphere  is  at  diffei'ent  temperatures  in  the 
upper  and  lower  strata,  such  conditions  may  have  some  general 


490 


Zantedeschi  on  the 


[Dec.  1847. 


influence  and  effect  upon  its  final  motion  and  action,  subject  as 
it  is  continually  to  the  magnetic  influence  of  the  earth. 

I  have  for  the  sake  of  brevity  frequently  spoken  in  this  letter 
of  bodies  as  being  magnetic  or  diamagnetic  in  relation  one  to 
another,  but  I  trust  that  in  all  the  cases  no  mistake  of  my 
meaning  could  arise  from  such  use  of  the  terms,  or  any  vague 
notion  arise  respecting  the  clear  distinction  between  the  two 
classes,  especially  as  my  view  of  the  true  zero  has  been  given 
only  a  page  or  two  back, 

I  am,  my  dear  Sir, 

Yours,  &c., 

Richard  Taylor,  Esq.,  M.  Faraday. 

Ed.  Phil.  Mag.,  S^c.  ^c. 


On  the  Motions  presented  by  Flame  when  under  the  Electro- 
magnetic Influence.    By  Prof.  Zantedeschi. 

The  most  eminent  philosophers  have  at  all  times  maintained 
the  universality  of  the  magnetism  of  bodies^;  and  in  our  days 
Faraday  is  the  only  one  who  has  placed  the  expansible  fluids  at 
the  zero  of  the  scale  of  action  among  magnetic  and  diamagnetic 
bodies.   On  the  21st  of  September  1847,  at  the  Physical  Section 
of  the  Ninth  Itahan  Scientific  Congress  in  Venice,  Padre  Ban- 
calari.  Professor  of  Physics  in  the  Royal  University  of  Genoa, 
read  a  memoir  on  the  universality  of  magnetism ;  and  the  argu- 
ment was  considered  by  philosophers  to  be  of  such  importance, 
that  a  desire  arose  to  verify  chiefly  the  action  of  magnetism  on 
expansible  fluids.    It  w'as  announced  by  the  Reporter  BeUi  at 
the  sitting  of  the  27th  of  September,  that  it  had  been  proved  in 
the  presence  of  various  philosophers  that,  on  the  interposition 
of  a  flame  between  the  two  poles  of  an  electro-magnet,  it  was  re- 
pulsed at  the  instant  the  electric  current  was  closed,  to  return  to 
the  first  position  the  instant  it  was  broken.    This  discovery  re- 
ceived well-merited  applause  in  the  sitting  of  the  28th  of  Sep- 
tember, from  the  General  Secretary  and  the  Secretary  of  the 
Section  of  Physics.    A  wish  was  expressed  by  some  to  witness 
the  experiment  of  Bancalari ;  and  a  Daniell's  apparatus  having 
been  got  ready,  of  ten  elements  eighteen  centimeters  each  in  di- 
mension, I  endeavoured  to  repeat  the  experiment  in  the  Cabinet 
'  RaccoUa  Fisico-  Chimica  Italiam,  t.  iii.  Dei  corpi  magnetici  e  diamagnetici. 


Dec.  1847.] 


magnetic  condition  of  flame. 


491 


of  Physics  of  the  Royal  Imperial  Lyceum  of  Venice  ;  but  I  did 
not  chance  to  see  the  asserted  phaenomenon.  My  temporary 
magnet  had  the  power  of  sustaining  above  48  kilogrms.  weight ; 
but  as  my  principle  is,  that  a  negative  argument  never  destroys 
a  positive  one,  I  for  my  further  information  requested  the  ma- 
chinist Cobres  to  give  me  the  particulars  of  the  apparatus  ;  Belli 
not  having  treated  of  these  in  his  report,  and  they  having 
escaped  Prof.  Zambra,  the  Secretary  of  the  Section.  I  knew  that 
the  two  pieces  of  soft  iron,  which  constituted  the  interrupted 
anchor,  were  perforated  in  the  axial  direction.  I  suspected  that 
the  repulsion  of  the  flame  was  not  the  immediate  effect  of  the 
magnetism,  but  of  two  currents  of  air  issuing  from  the  apertures 
of  the  perforated  keeper  generated  by  a  vorticose  movement 
produced  by  the  magnetism,  as  the  celebrated  Faraday  had  ob- 
served in  liquids  ^ ;  and  I  was  confirmed  in  this  suspicion  by  the 
negative  experiment  which  I  had  instituted  in  Venice  with  solid 
pieces.  On  arriving  in  Turin,  I  communicated  my  doubts  to 
the  well-known  mechanicians  Jest,  father  and  son,  who  to  their 
professional  abiUties  unite  a  rare  courtesy.  They  soon  furnished 
me  in  their  laboratory  with  a  Bunsen's  apparatus,  and  constructed 
terminal  pieces  of  soft  iron  forming  the  interrupted  anchor,  both 
solid  and  pierced,  of  a  parallelopipedon  and  cylindric  form,  as  I 
pointed  out  to  them;  and  I  have  repeated  the  experiments  in 
their  company :  the  temporary  magnet,  made  in  the  shape  of  a 
horseshoe,  was  formed  of  a  cylinder  of  soft  iron  of  the  length  of 
0«^'335  and  the  diameter  of  0*^-01 5;  and  its  electro-magnetic  spiral 
was  formed  of  a  copper  wire  SS"^  long,  and  of  a  diameter  of  a  milli- 
meter and  a  third;  the  internal  distance  of  the  poles  was  0'"-027; 
the  two  solid  parallelopipedon  contacts,  forming  the  interrupted 
anchor,  were  0™-04  long;  and  of  the  sides  Qm-Ol  1  and  O-n-OOG  :  and 
the  hollow  terminal  pieces  were  0^-035  long;  and  of  the  side 
0™-009.  They  were  placed  at  a  distance  from  one  another  of  four 
to  five  millimeters,  the  magnet  being  kept  in  a  vertical  position 
with  the  poles  turned  upwards.  In  front  of  the  interval  of  the 
separation  of  the  contact  pieces  was  placed  the  flame  of  a  small 
candle,  or  of  a  httle  oil  or  alcohol  lamp,  so  that  it  surmounted  with 
its  top  by  nearly  a  fourth  the  thickness  of  the  contacts.  The 
electric  circuit  was  closed  by  copper  wires, and  the  metallic  unions 

1  Raccolta,  cited  above,  t.  ii.  Relazione  dell'  influenza  delle  foize  clcttriclie 
e  magnetiche  sulla  luce  ed  il  calorico. 


492  Zantedeschi  on  the  [Dec.  1847. 

were  maintained  both  at  the  magnetic  poles  and  at  those  of  the 
pile  by  clamps  :  one  of  the  wires  therefore  was  divided  into  two 
equal  parts,  and  the  ends  being  dipped  into  a  tumbler  of  mercury, 
allowed  the  closing  and  opening  of  the  circuit  at  pleasure. 

/  have  constantly  observed  repulsio7i  in  the  act  of  closing  the 
circle,  which  lasted  the  whole  time  that  the  magnetism  was  kept 
up ;  and,  when  in  the  act  of  opening  the  circle,  I  saw  the  flame 
return  to  its  primitive  posHion.  Well  satisfied  with  having  in 
this  manner  confirmed  this  important  fact  M'hich  reflects  honour 
on  its  discoverer,  I  applied  myself  to  the  study  of  the  phaeno- 
menon,  and  I  found — 

I.  That  this  happens  with  contacts  of  both  solid  and  hollow 
soft  iron ;  whereupon  I  abandoned  my  suspicion  that  the  move- 
ment of  the  flame  was  attributable  to  currents  of  air ;  1  convinced 
myself  that  it  was  an  immediate  action  of  the  magnetism  upon 
the  flame, — a  fact  of  the  greatest  importance  to  science. 

II.  That  the  repulsion,  when  it  is  quite  distinct  and  the  flame 
quite  pure,  and  terminated  in  a  well-shaped  top,  is  accompanied 
by  depression :  repulsion  and  depression  are  simultaneously  ob- 
served at  the  closing  of  the  circle ;  the  return  of  the  flame  and 
rising  of  the  same,  at  the  opening  of  the  circle. 

III.  That,  ceteris  paribus,  the  greatest  effect  takes  place  when 
the  flame  is  touching  the  convex  of  the  magnetic  curves  indicated 
by  iron  filings. 

IV.  That  the  action  is  null,  or  almost  null,  when  the  flame  is 
placed  in  the  centre  of  the  interval  tohich  separates  the  two  con- 
tacts. 

V.  That  in  the  manifestation  of  the  effects  stated  above,  it  is 
not  necessary  for  the  contacts  to  be  entirely  separated :  they  may 
be  placed  at  an  angle  and  touch  at  two  corners ;  the  flame  placed 
within  the  base  of  this  triangle,  generally  manifests  the  two 
phainomena  indicated. 

VI.  That  there  is  a  certain  mass  of  the  contacts  {or  keeper 
pieces)  which  is  the  most  efficacious :  beyond  a  limit,  which  can 
be  shown  by  experiment,  increase  of  the  mass  causes  a  diminution 
of  the  effect',  from  this  I  found  the  cause  of  my  negative  re- 
sults, which  I  obtained  in  Venice  in  the  first  experiments  that  I 
made. 

VII.  That  the  movements  of  the  flame  increase  with  the  number 
of  the  pairs  [of  battery  plates).    With  one  pair  the  effect  was 


Dec.  1847.]         magnetic  condition  of  flame. 


493 


not  perceptible  to  me' ;  ivith  two  pairs  the  movements  began  to 
show  themselves ;  with  three  pairs  they  became  distinct,  and  in- 
creased with  the  increase  of  the  number  of  pairs  up  to  ten,  which 
was  the  greatest  that  I  employed  in  this  experiment.  The  pairs 
were  of  the  knoivn  ordinary  size. 

On  the  repetition  of  the  phaenomena  as  above  stated,  the  pre- 
caution was  taken  to  cover  the  apparatus  with  a  bell,  which  was 
open  above  and  supported  by  two  discs  below,  which  left  a  free 
access  to  the  air,  by  which  to  support  the  combustion :  in  this 
manner  all  agitation  and  danger  of  disturbance  under  the  cir- 
cumstances were  avoided. 

I  must  not  forget,  in  concluding  this  article,  to  state  that  the 
celebrated  Prof.  Gazzaniga,  starting  from  his  numerous  experi- 
ments, which  demonstrate  the  influence  of  magnetism  upon  the 
same  aeriform  fluids,  in  a  manner  therefore  different  from  that 
of  Bancalari,  was  induced  to  consider  the  sun  and  all  the  other 
celestial  bodies  as  so  many  enormous  magnets ;  by  which  he 
established  that  attraction  is  merely  an  effect  of  the  magnetism  of 
the  great  celestial  masses  placed  at  an  enormous  distance, — an 
idea  which  reappeared  in  1846  in  Prussia,  and  in  1847  in  France, 
as  we  see  from  the  Comptes  Rendus  of  the  Royal  Academy  of 
Sciences  at  Paris.  The  mystery  that  attraction  operates  at  a 
distance  without  intermedia  would  be  removed  in  this  case,  and 
the  phaenomena  of  attraction  would  enter  again  into  the  class  of 
those  of  common  dynamics. 

Dalla  Gazz.  Piem., 
Oct.  12,  1847,  No.  242. 

'  Messrs.  Jest  prepared  for  me  last  evening  an  electro-magnet  of  a  circular 
form  interrupted  by  a  prismatic  section  having  an  interval  of  two  millimeters ; 
and  I  had,  without  need  of  contact  pieces,  the  phsenomena  distinct  with  a 
single  element.  The  most  conspicuous  movements  here  appeared  in  the  greater 
proximity  of  the  flame  to  the  section. 

The  complete  apparatus,  of  a  circular  form,  furnished  with  a  glass  bell  with 
its  accessories,  is  sold  in  Turin  by  Messrs.  Jest,  at  the  price  of  thirty  francs, 
not  including  the  electro-motor. 


494 


On  the  Use  of  Gutta  Percha  in  Electrical  Insulation^. 

My  dear  Phillips, 
I  HAVE  lately  found  gutta  percha  very  useful  in  electrical  ex- 
periments ;  and  therefore,  that  others  may  take  advantage  of  its 
properties  if  they  have  occasion  or  are  so  inclined,  give  you  this 
notice  for  insertion  in  the  Philosophical  Magazine.  Its  use  de- 
pends upon  the  high  insulating  power  which  it  possesses  under 
ordinary  conditions,  and  the  manner  in  which  it  keeps  this  power 
in  states  of  the  atmosphere  which  make  the  surface  of  glass  a 
good  conductor.  All  gutta  percha  is  not  however  equally  good 
as  it  comes  from  the  manufacturer's  hands ;  but  it  does  not  seem 
difficult  to  bring  it  into  the  best  state:  I  will  describe  the 
qualities  of  a  proper  specimen,  and  refer  to  the  differences  after- 
wards. A  good  piece  of  gutta  percha  will  insulate  as  well  as  an 
equal  piece  of  shell-lac,  M-hether  it  be  in  the  form  of  sheet,  or 
rod,  or  filament;  but  being  tough  and  flexible  Avhen  cold,  as 
well  as  soft  when  hot,  it  will  serve  better  than  shell-lac  in  many 
cases  where  the  brittleness  of  the  latter  is  an  inconvenience. 
Thus  it  makes  very  good  handles  for  carriers  of  electricity  in 
experiments  on  induction,  not  being  liable  to  fracture :  in  the 
form  of  thin  band  or  string  it  makes  an  excellent  insulating 
suspender:  a  piece  of  it  in  sheet  makes  a  most  convenient  insu- 
lating basis  for  anything  placed  on  it.  It  forms  excellent  insu- 
lating plugs  for  the  stems  of  gold-leaf  electrometers  when  they 
pass  through  sheltering  tubes,  and  larger  plugs  supply  good 
insulating  feet  for  extemporary  electrical  arrangements  :  cylinders 
of  it  half  an  inch  or  more  in  diameter  have  great  stiffiiess,  and 
form  excellent  insulating  pillars.  In  these  and  in  many  other 
ways  its  power  as  an  insulator  may  be  useful. 

Because  of  its  good  insulation  it  is  also  an  excellent  substance 
for  the  excitement  of  negative  electricity.  It  is  hardly  possible 
to  take  one  of  the  soles  sold  by  the  shoemakers  out  of  paper  or 
into  the  hand,  without  exciting  it  to  such  a  degree  as  to  open 
the  leaves  of  an  electrometer  one  or  more  inches;  or  if  it  be 
unelectrified,  the  slightest  passage  over  the  hand  or  face,  the 
clothes,  or  almost  any  other  substance  gives  it  an  electric  state. 
Some  of  the  gutta  percha  is  sold  in  very  thin  sheets,  resembling 

*  Philosophical  Magazine,  March  1848,  xxxii.  165. 


Feb.  1848.]      Insulating  poiver  of  gutta  percha. 


495 


in  general  appearance  oiled  silk ;  and  if  a  strip  of  this  be  drawn 
through  the  fingers,  it  is  so  electric  as  to  adhere  to  the  hand  or 
attract  pieces  of  paper.  The  appearance  is  such  as  to  suggest 
the  making  a  thicker  sheet  of  the  substance  into  a  plate  electrical 
machine  for  the  production  of  negative  electricity. 

Then  as  to  inductive  action  through  the  substance,  a  sheet  of 
it  is  soon  converted  into  an  excellent  electrophorus ;  or  it  may- 
be coated  and  used  in  place  of  a  Leyden  jar ;  or  in  any  of  the 
many  other  forms  of  apparatus  dependent  on  inductive  action. 

I  have  said  that  all  gutta  percha  is  not  in  this  good  electrical 
condition.    With  respect  to  that  which  is  not  so  (and  M'hich  has 
constituted  about  one-half  of  that  which,  being  obtained  at  the 
shops,  has  passed  through  my  hands),  it  has  either  discharged 
an  electrometer  as  a  piece  of  paper  or  wood  would  do,  or  it 
has  made  it  collapse  greatly  by  touching,  yet  has  on  its  removal 
been  followed  by  a  full  opening  of  the  leaves  again :  the  latter 
effect  I  have  been  able  to  trace  and  refer  to  a  conducting  portion 
within  the  mass  covered  by  a  thin  external  non-conducting  coat. 
When  a  piece  which  insulates  well  is  cut,  the  surface  exposed 
has  a  resinous  lustre  and  a  compact  character  that  is  very  di- 
stinctive ;  whilst  that  which  conducts  has  not  the  same  degree  of 
lustre,  appears  less  translucent,  and  has  more  the  aspect  of  a 
turbid  solution  solidified.    I  believe  both  moist  steam-heat  and 
water-baths  are  used  in  its  preparation  for  commerce ;  and  the 
difference  of  specimens  depends  probably  upon  the  manner  in 
which  these  are  applied,  and  followed  by  the  after  process  of 
rolling  between  hot  cylinders.    However,  if  a  portion  of  that 
which  conducts  be  warmed  in  a  current  of  hot  air,  as  over  the 
glass  of  a  low  gas  flame,  and  be  stretched,  doubled  up,  and 
kneaded  for  some  time  between  the  fingers,  as  if  with  the  inten- 
tion of  dissipating  the  moisture  within,  it  becomes  as  good  an 
insulator  as  the  best. 

I  have  soaked  a  good  piece  in  water  for  an  hour;  and  on 
taking  it  out,  wiping  it,  and  exposing  it  to  the  air  for  a  minute 
or  two,  found  it  insulate  as  well  as  ever.  Another  piece  was 
soaked  for  four  days  and  then  wiped  and  tried :  at  first  it  was 
found  lowered  in  insulating  power ;  but  after  twelve  hours'  ex- 
posure to  air  under  common  circumstances  it  was  as  good  as 
ever.  I  have  not  found  that  a  week's  exposure  in  a  warm  air 
cupboard  of  a  piece  that  did  not  insulate  made  it  much  better : 


496 


Insulating  power  of  gutta  percha.      [Feb.  1848. 


a  film  on  the  outside  became  non-conducting ;  but  if  two  fresh 
surfaces  were  exposed  by  cutting,  and  these  were  brought  into 
contact  with  the  electrometer  and  the  finger,  the  inside  por- 
tion was  still  found  to  conduct. 

If  the  gutta  percha  in  either  the  good  or  the  bad  condition 
(as  to  electrical  service)  be  submitted  to  a  gradually  increasing 
temperature,  at  about  350°  or  380°,  it  gives  off  a  considerable 
proportion  of  water;  being  then  cooled,  the  substance  which 
remains  has  the  general  properties  of  gutta  percha,  and  insulates 
well.  The  original  gum  is  probably  complicated,  being  a  mix- 
ture of  several  things ;  and  whether  the  water  has  existed  in  the 
substance  as  a  hydrate,  or  is  the  result  of  a  deeper  change  of  one 
part  or  another  of  the  gum,  I  am  not  prepared  to  say.  All  I 
desire  in  this  note  is  to  make  known  its  use  in  the  arrangement 
of  extemporary  or  permanent  electrical  apparatus  for  the  advan- 
tage of  working  philosophers,  both  juvenile  and  adult. 

I  am,  dear  Phillips, 

Yours, 

M.  Faraday. 

Royal  Institution, 
Feb.  9,  1848. 


497 


Observations  on  the  Magnetic  Force^. 

Inasmuch  as  the  general  considerations  to  be  brought  forward 
have  respect  to  those  great  forces  of  the  globe,  exerted  by  it,  both 
as  a  mass  and  through  its  particles,  namely  magnetism  and 
gravitation,  it  is  necessary  briefly  to  recall  certain  relations 
and  differences  of  the  two  which  have  been  insisted  upon  on 
former  occasions.  Both  can  act  at  a  distance,  and  doubtless 
at  any  distance ;  but  whilst  gravitation  may  be  considered  as 
simple  and  unpolar  in  its  relations,  magnetism  is  dual  and 
polar.  Hence  one  gravitating  particle  or  system  cannot  be  con- 
ceived to  act  by  gravitation,  as  a  particle  or  system,  on  itself; 
whereas  a  magnetic  particle  or  system,  because  of  the  dual  nature 
'of  its  force,  can  have  such  a  self-relation.  Again,  either  polarity 
of  the  magnetic  force  can  act  either  by  attraction  or  repulsion  ; 
and  not  merely  so,  but  the  joint  or  dual  action  of  a  magnet  can 
act  also  either  by  attraction  or  repulsion,  as  in  the  case  of  para- 
magnetic and  diamagnetic  bodies  :  the  action  of  gravity  is  always 
that  of  attraction.  As  a  further  consequence  of  the  difference 
in  character  of  the  powers,  little  or  no  doubt  was  entertained 
regarding  the  existence  of  physical  lines  of  force^  in  the  cases 
of  dual  powers,  as  electricity  and  magnetism ;  but  in  respect  of 
gravitation  the  conclusion  did  not  seem  so  sure.  In  reference  to 
the  growing  magnetic  relations  of  the  sun  and  the  earth,  it  is 
well  to  keep  in  mind  Arago's  idea,  of  the  relative  magnitude  of 
the  two  ;  for,  supposing  that  the  centres  of  the  two  globes 
were  made  to  coincide,  the  sun's  body  would  not  only  extend 
as  far  as  the  moon,  but  nearly  as  far  again,  its  bulk  being  about 
seven  times  that  of  a  globe  which  should  be  girdled  by  the 
moon's  orbit. 

For  the  more  careful  study  of  the  magnetic  power,  a  torsion 
balance  has  been  constructed  of  a  particular  kind.  The  torsion 
wire  was  of  hard  draM'n  platinum,  24  inches  in  length,  and  of 
such  diameter  that  28*5  inches  weighed  one  grain.    It  was 

'  Proceedings  of  tlie  Royal  Institution,  Jan.  21,  1853. 

2  Proceedings  of  the  Royal  Institution,  June  11,  1852,  p.  216  (see  p.  438) ; 
also  Phil.  Mag.  4th  Series,  1852,  iii.  p.  401,  (see  p.  407). 

VOL.  111.  2  K 


498  Magnetic  force — Logeman's  magnet.      [Jan.  1853. 

attached  as  usual  to  a  torsion  head  and  index.  The  horizontal 
beam  was  a  small  glass  tube  terminated  at  the  object  end  by  a 
glass  hook.  The  objects  to  be  submitted  to  the  magnetic  force 
were  either  cylinders  of  glass  with  a  filament  drawn  out  from  each, 
so  as  to  make  a  long  stiff  hook  for  suspension  from  the  beam ;  or 
cylindrical  bulbs  of  glass,  of  like  shape,  but  larger  size,  formed  out 
of  glass  tube  ;  or  other  matters.  The  fine  tubular  extremities  of 
the  bulbs  being  opened,  the  way  through  was  free  from  end  to  end; 
the  bulbs  could  then  be  filled  with  any  fluid  or  gas,  sealed,  and  be 
re-submitted  many  times  in  succession  to  the  magnetic  force.  The 
source  of  power  employed  was  at  first  a  large  electro-magnet ;  but 
afterwards,  in  order  to  be  certain  of  a  constant  power,  and  for  the 
advantage  of  alloM'ing  any  length  of  time  for  the  observations 
the  great  magnet,  constructed  by  M.  Logeman  upon  the  prin- 
ciples developed  by  Dr.  Elias  (and  which,  weighing  above 
100  lbs.,  could  support  430  lbs.  according  to  the  report  of  the 
Great  Exhibition  J ury),  was  purchased  by  the  Royal  Institution 
and  used  in  the  inquiries.  The  magnet  was  so  arranged  that 
the  axis  of  power  was  5  inches  below  the  level  of  the  glass 
beam,  the  interval  being  traversed  by  the  suspension  filament 
or  hook,  spoken  of  above.  The  form  and  position  of  the  termi- 
nations of  soft  iron  are  shown  in  plan  by  the  diagram  upon  a 
scale  of  yi^,  and  also  the  place  of  the  object.    All  this  part  is 


enclosed  in  the  box  which  belongs  to  and  carries  the  torsion- 
balance,  which  box  is  governed  by  six  screws  fixed  upon  the 
magnet  table ;  and  as  both  the  box  and  the  table  have  lines  and 
scales  marked  upon  them,  it  is  easy  to  adjust  the  former  on  the 
latter  so  that  the  beam  shall  be  over  and  parallel  to  the  line  a,  e, 
with  the  point  of  suspension  over  c ;  or,  by  moving  the  whole 
box  parallel  to  itself  towards  »^,  to  give  the  point  of  suspension 
any  other  distance  from  the  angle  c.  As  already  said,  the  objects 
were  constructed  with  a  suspension  filament  of  such  length  as  to 
make  them  coincide  in  height  with  the  angle  in  the  magnetic 
field.    When  suspended  on  the  beam,  they  were  counterpoised 


Jan.  1853.]  Torsion-balance.  499 

by  a  ring  or  rings  of  lead  on  the  further  arm  of  the  beam.  These 
when  required  were  moved  along  the  beam  until  the  latter  was  hori- 
zontal ;  and  that  state  was  ascertained  by  a  double  arm  support, 
which  sustained  the  beam  when  out  of  use,  brought  it  into  a 
steady  state  when  moving,  and  delivered  it  into  a  condition  of 
freedom  when  required.  The  naotion  of  the  box  to  the  right  or 
left,  so  as  to  place  the  object  in  the  middle  of  the  magnetic  angle, 
was  given  by  two  of  the  screws  before  spoken  of;  the  motion  to 
the  given  distance  from  c,  by  the  other  four. 

Supposing  the  distance  from  c  towards  m  to  be  adjusted  to 
0-6  of  an  inch,  when  the  beam  was  loaded  above,  and  no  object 
before  the  magnet  (the  beam  having  been  of  course  previously 
adjusted  to  its  normal  position  and  the  torsion  index  placed  at 
zero),  it  then  remained  to  determine  the  return  of  the  beam  to 
its  place  when  the  object  had  been  suspended  on  it  and  repelled  : 
this  was  done  in  the  following  manner.  A  small  plane  reflector 
is  fixed  on  the  beam,  near  its  middle  part,  under  the  point  of 
suspension ;  a  small  telescope  associated  with  a  divided  scale  is 
placed  about  6  feet  from  the  reflector,  and  in  such  a  position 
that  when  the  beam  is  in  its  right  place,  a  given  degree  in  the 
scale  coincides  w  ith  the  fine  wire  in  the  telescope.  Of  course 
the  scale  appears  to  pass  by  the  wire  as  the  beam  itself  moves, 
and  W'ith  a  double  angular  velocity,  because  of  the  reflexion.  As 
it  is  easy  to  read  to  the  fiftieth  and  even  to  the  hundredth  of 
an  inch  in  this  way,  and  as  each  degree  occupies  apparently 
2-4  inches  with  the  radius  of  6  feet,  so  an  angular  motion,  or 
difference  of  ^io^'^  ^  degree  could  be  observed ;  and  as  the 
radius  of  the  arm  of  the  beam  carrying  the  object  was  6  inches, 
such  a  quantity  there  would  be  less  than  2  oV o^'^^  inch  ;  i.  e. 
the  return  of  the  beam  to  its  first  or  normal  position  by  the 
torsion  force  put  on  to  counteract  the  repulsion,  could  be  ascer- 
tained to  within  that  amount.  When  an  object  was  put  on  the 
adjusted  beam,  if  diamagnetic  it  was  repelled;  and  then,  as  the 
observer  sat  at  the  telescope,  he,  by  means  of  a  long  handle, 
a  wheel  and  pinion,  put  on  torsion  until  the  place  of  the  beam 
was  restored ;  and  afterwards  the  amount  of  torsion  read  off"  on 
the  graduated  scale  became  the  measure  in  degrees  of  the  repul- 
sive force  exerted.  At  the  time  of  real  observations,  the  magnet, 
balance,  and  telescope  were  all  fixed  in  a  basement  room,  upon 
a  stone  floor.  But  it  is  unnecessary  to  describe  here  the  numerous 

2  K  2 


500  Magnetic  force — relation  of  media.     [Jan.  1853. 

precautions  required  in  relation  to  the  time  of  an  observation, 
the  set  of  the  suspension  wire  by  a  high  torsion,  the  possible 
electricity  of  the  object  or  beam  by  touch,  the  effect  of  feeble 
currents  of  air  within  the  box,  the  shape  of  the  object,  the  pre- 
caution against  capillary  action  when  fluids  were  employed  as 
media,  and  other  circumstances  ;  or  the  use  of  certam  stops,  and 
the  mode  of  procedure  in  the  cases  of  paramagnetic  action  ;— 
the  object  being  at  present  to  present  only  an  inteUigent  view  of 
the  principles  of  action.  . 

When  a  body  is  submitted  to  the  power  of  a  magnet,  it  is 
affected,  as  to  the  result,  not  merely  by  the  magnet,  but  also  by 
the  medium  surrounding  it ;  and  even  if  that  medium  be  changed 
for  a  vacuum,  the  vacuum  and  the  body  still  are  in  like  relation 
to  each  other.    In  fact  the  result  is  always  differential;  any 
change  in  the  medium  changes  the  actiou  on  the  object,  and 
there  are  abundance  of  substances  which  when  surrounded  by 
air  are  repelled,  and  when  by  water,  are  attracted,  upon  the 
approach  of  a  magnet.    When  a  certain  small  glass  cylinder 
weighing  only  66  grains  was  submitted  on  the  torsion- balance 
to  the  Logeman  magnet  surrounded  by  air,  at  the  distance  of 
0-5  of  an  inch  from  the  axial  line,  it  required  15°  of  torsion  to 
overcome  the  repulsive  force  and  restore  the  object  to  its  place. 
When  a  vessel  of  water  was  put  into  the  magnetic  field,  and  the 
experiment  repeated,  the  cylinder  being  now  in  the  water  was 
attracted,  and  54°-5  of  torsion  were  required  to  overcome  this  at- 
traction at  the  given  distance  of  0-5.  If  the  vessel  had  contained 
a  fluid  exactly  equal  in  diamagnetic  power  to  the  cyhnder  of  glass, 
neither  attraction  nor  repulsion  would  have  been  exerted  on  the 
latter,  and  therefore  the  torsion  would  have  been  0°.  Hence 
the  three  bodies,  air,  glass  (the  especial  specimen),  and  water, 
have  their  relative  force  measured  in  relation  to  each  other  by 
the  three  experimental  numbers  15°,  0°,  and  54°-5.    If  other 
fluids  are  taken,  as  oil,  ffither,  &c.,  and  employed  as  the  media 
surrounding  the  same  glass  cylinder,  then  the  degrees  of  torsion 
obtained  with  each  of  them  respectively,  show  its  place  in  the 
magnetic  series.    It  is  the  principle  of  the  hydrometer  or  of 
Archimedes  in  respect  of  gravity  apphed  in  the  case  of  the  mag- 
netic forces.    If  a  different  cylinder  be  employed  of  another  size 
or  substance,  or  at  a  different  distance,  the  torsion  numbers  will 
be  different,  and  the  zero  (given  by  the  cylinder)  also  different ; 


Jan.  1853.]        Scale  of  magnetic  force— zet'o.  501 

but  the  media  (with  an  exception  to  be  made  hereafter)  will  have 
the  same  relation  to  each  other  as  in  the  former  case.  Therefore 
to  bring  all  the  experimental  results  into  one  common  relation, 
a  Centigrade  scale  has  been  adopted  bounded  by  air  and  water 
at  common  temperatures,  or  60°  F.  For  this  purpose  every 
separate  series  of  results  made  under  exactly  the  same  circum- 
stances included  air  and  water ;  and  then  all  the  results  of  one 
series  were  multiplied  by  such  a  number  as  would  convert  the 
difference  between  air  and  water  into  100° :  in  this  way  the  three 
results  given  above  become  21°*6,  0°,  and  78°-4.  By  such  a 
process  the  magnetic  intervals  between  the  bodies  are  obtained  on 
the  Centigrade  scale,  but  the  true  zei'o  is  not  as  yet  determined. 
Either  water,  or  air,  or  the  glass,  may  be  assumed  as  the  zero, 
the  intervals  not  being  in  any  way  dependent  upon  that  point, 
but  the  results  will  then  vary  in  expression  thus : — 


Air 

o 

0 

o 

21-6 

100 

Glass 

21-6 

0 

78-4 

Water  . 

100 

78-4 

0 

all  above  the  zero  being  paramagnetic,  and  all  below  diamagnetic, 
in  relation  to  it.  I  have  adopted  a  vacuum  as  the  zero  in  the 
table  of  results  to  be  given  hereafter. 

In  this  manner  it  is  evident  that,  upon  principle,  any  solid, 
whatever  its  size,  shape,  or  quality,  may  be  included  in  the  list, 
by  its  subjection  to  a  magnet  in  air  and  in  water,  or  in  fluids 
already  related  to  these :  also  that  any  fluids  may  be  included, 
by  the  use  of  the  same  immersed  solid  body  for  them,  air  and 
w^ater ;  and  also  that  by  using  the  same  vessel,  as  for  instance 
the  same  glass  bulb,  and  filling  it  successively  with  various 
gases  and  fluids,  including  always  air  and  water  in  each  series, 
these  included  bodies  may  then  have  their  results  reduced  and 
be  entered  upon  the  list.    The  following  is  a  table  of  some  sub- 
stances estimated  on  the  Centigrade  scale,  and  though  there  are 
many  points  both  of  theory  and  practice  yet  to  be  wrought  out, 
as  regards  the  use  of  the  torsion-balance  described,  so  that  tlie 
results  can  only  as  yet  be  recorded  as  approximations,  even  now, 
the  average  of  three  or  four  careful  experiments  gives  an  ex- 
pression for  any  particular  substance  under  the  same  conditions 
of  distance,  power,  &c.  near  upon  and  often  within  a  degree 
of  the  place  assigned  to  it.    The  powers  are  expressed  for  a 


^02  Magnetic  relation  of  certain  bodies.    [Jan.  1853. 

distance  of  0-6  of  an  inch  from  the  magnetic  axis  of  the  magnet  as 
arranged  and  described,  and,  of  course,  for  equal  volumes  of  the 
bodies  mentioned.  The  extreme  decimal  places  must  not  be 
taken  as  correct,  except  as  regards  the  record  of  the  experi- 
ments :  they  are  the  results  of  calculation.  Hydrogen,  nitro- 
gen, and  perhaps  some  other  of  the  bodies  near  zero,  may 
ultimately  turn  out  to  be  as  a  vacuum ;  it  is  evident  that  a  very 
little  oxygen  wonld  produce  a  difference,  such  as  that  which 
appears  in  nitrogen  gas.  The  first  solution  of  copper  mentioned 
was  colourless,  and  the  second  the  same  solution  oxidized  by 
simple  agitation  in  a  bottle  with  air,  the  copper,  ammonia,  and 
water  being  in  both  the  same. 


Prot-ammo.  of  copper 

134-23 

Camphor  . 

82-59 

Per-ammo.  of  copper 

119-83 

Camphine 

82-96 

Oxygen 

17-5 

Linseed  oil 

85-56 

Air     .       .       .  . 

3-4 

Olive  oil  . 

85-6 

defiant  gas 

0-6 

Wax 

86-73 

Nitrogen 

0-3 

Nitric  acid 

87-96 

Vacuum 

0-0 

Water 

96-6 

Carbonic  acid  gas 

0-0 

Solution  of  ammonia 

98-5 

Hydrogen  . 

0-1 

Bisulphide  of  carbon 

99-64 

Ammonia  gas 

0-5 

Sat.  sol.  nitre  . 

100-08 

Cyanogen  . 

0-9 

Sulphuric  acid  . 

104-47 

A  glass 

18-2 

Sulphur  . 

118 

Pure  zinc  . 

74-6 

Chloride  of  arsenic  . 

121-73 

^ther 

75-3 

Fused  borate  of  lead  . 

136-6 

Alcohol,  absolute 

78-7 

Phosphorus 

Oil  of  lemons 

80 

Bismuth  . 

1967-6 

Pliicker  in  his  very  valuable  paper'  has  dealt  with  bodies 
which  are  amongst  the  highly  paramagnetic  substances,  and  his 
estimate  of  power  is  made  for  equal  weights. 

One  great  object  in  the  construction  of  an  instrument  delicate 
as  that  described,  was  the  investigation  of  certain  points  in  the 
philosophy  of  magnetism  ;  and  amongst  them  especially  that  of 
the  right  application  of  the  law  of  the  inverse  square  of  the  di- 
stance as  the  universal  law  of  magnetic  action.  Ordinary  mag- 
netic    may  action  be  divided  into  two  kinds,  that  between 

'  Taylor's  Scientific  Memoirs,  vol.  v.  pp.  713,  730. 


Jan.  1853.]    Law  of  the  inverse  square  of  the  distance.  503 

magnets  permanently  magnetized  and  unchangeable  in  their 
condition,  and  that  between  bodies  of  which  one  is  a  permanent 
unchangeable  magnet,  and  the  other,  having  no  magnetic  state 
of  its  own,  receives  and  retains  its  state  only  whilst  in  subjection 
to  the  first.  The  former  kind  of  action  appears  in  the  most  rigid 
and  pure  cases  to  be  subject  to  that  law;  but  it  would  be  pre- 
mature to  assume  beforehand,  and  without  abundant  sufficient 
evidence,  that  the  same  law  applies  in  the  second  set  of  cases 
also ;  for  a  hasty  assumption  might  be  in  opposition  to  the  truth 
of  nature,  and  therefore  injurious  to  the  progress, of  science,  by 
the  creation  of  a  preconceived  conclusion.  We  know  not  whe- 
ther such  bodies  as  oxygen,  copper,  water,  bismuth,  &c.,  owe 
their  respective  paramagnetic  and  diamagnetic  relation  to  a 
greater  or  less  facility  of  conduction  in  regard  to  the  Hues  of 
magnetic  force,  or  to  something  like  a  polarity  of  their  particles 
or  masses,  or  to  some  as  yet  unsuspected  state ;  and  there  is 
little  hope  of  our  developing  the  true  condition,  and  therefore 
the  cause  of  magnetic  action,  if  we  assume  beforehand  the  un- 
proved law  of  action  and  reject  the  experiments  that  already 
bear  upon  it ; — for  Pliicker  has  distinctly  stated  as  the  fact,  that 
diamagnetic  force  increases  more  rapidly  than  magnetic  force, 
when  the  power  of  the  dominant  magnet  is  increased ;  and  such 
a  fact  is  contrary  to  the  law  above  enunciated.  The  following 
are  further  results  in  relation  to  this  point. 

When  a  body  is  submitted  to  the  great  unchanging  Logeman 
magnet  in  air  and  in  water,  and  the  results  are  reduced  to  the 
Centigrade  scale,  the  relation  of  the  three  substances  remains  the 
same  for  the  same  distance,  but  not  for  different  distances. 
Thus,  when  a  given  cylinder  of  flint-glass  was  submitted  to  the 
magnet  surrounded  by  air  and  by  water,  at  the  distance  of  0*3 
of  an  inch,  as  already  described,  it  proved  to  be  diamagnetic  in 
relation  to  both;  and  when  the  results  were  corrected  to  the 
Centigrade  scale,  and  water  made  zero,  it  was  9°"1  below,  or  on 
the  diamagnetic  side  of  water.  At  the  distance  0*4  of  an  inch  it 
was  10°'6  below  water :  at  the  distance  of  0*7  it  was  \'2°-\  below 
water.  When  a  more  diamagnetic  body,  as  heavy  glass,  was 
employed,  the  same  result  in  a  higher  degree  was  obtained ;  for 
at  the  distance  of  0*3  it  was  37°*8  below  water,  and  at  that  of 
0-8  it  was  48°"6  beneath  it.  Bismuth  presented  a  still  more 
striking  case,  though,  as  the  volume  of  the  substance  was 


504 


Magnetic  force : — 


[Jan.  1853. 


necessarily  small,  equal  confidence  cannot  be  placed  in  the  exacti- 
tude of  the  numbers.  The  results  are  given  below  for  the  three 
substances,  air  being  always  100°  and  water  (f ;  the  first  column 
of  figures  for  each  substance  contains  the  distance  '  in  tenths  of 
an  inch  from  the  axial  line  of  the  magnetic  field,  and  the  second, 
the  place  in  Centigrade  magnetic  degrees  below  water. 


Flint-Glass. 

Heavy  Glass, 

Bismuth. 

0-3  —  9-1 

0-3  —  37*8 

0-6  —  1871 

0-4  —  10:6 

0-4  —  38-6 

1-0  —  2734 

0-5  —  11-1 

0-6  —  40-0 

1-5  —  3626 

0-6  —  11-2 

0-8  ~  48-6 

0-7  —  12-1 

1-0  —  51-5 

1-2  —  65-6 

The  result  here  is,  that  the  greater  the  distance  of  the  diamag- 
netic  body  from  the  magnet,  the  more  diamagnetic  is  it  in  re- 
lation to  water,  taking  the  interval  between  water  and  air  as  the 
standard :  and  it  would  further  appear,  if  an  opinion  may  be 
formed  fi-om  so  few  experiments,  that  the  more  diamagnetic  the 
body  compared  to  air  and  water,  the  greater  does  this  difference 
become.    At  first  it  was  thought  possible  that  the  results  might 
be  due  to  some  previous  state  induced  upon  the  body,  by  its 
having  been  nearer  to  or  further  from  the  magnet ;  but  it  was 
found  that  whether  the  progress  of  the  experiments  was  from 
small  to  large  distances,  or  the  reverse  ;  or  whether,  at  any  given 
distance,  the  object  M^as  previous  to  the  measurement  held  close 
up  to  the  magnet  or  brought  from  a  distance,  the  results  were 
the  same ; — no  evidence  of  a  temporary  induced  state  could  in 
any  of  these  ways  be  found. 

It  does  not  follow  from  the  experiments,  if  they  should  be 
sustained  by  future  researches,  that  it  is  the  glass  or  the  bismuth 

»  A  given  change  of  distance  necessarily  implies  change  in  degree  of  force, 
and  change  in  the  forms  of  the  lines  of  force ;  but  it  does  not  imply  always 
the  same  amount  of  change.  The  forces  are  not  the  same  at  the  same  di- 
stance of  0-4  of  an  inch  in  opposite  directions  from  the  axial  line  towards  m  and 
n  in  the  figure,  page  498,  nor  at  any  other  equal  moderate  distance  ;  and  thougli 
by  increase  and  diminution  of  distance  the  change  is  in  the  same  direction,  it 
is  not  in  the  same  proportion.  By  fitly  arranged  terminations,  it  may  be  made 
to  alter  with  extreme  rapidity  in  one  direction,  and  with  extreme  slowness  or 
not  at  all  in  another. 


Jan.  1853.] 


its  variation  by  distance. 


505 


only  that  changes  in  relation  to  the  other  two  bodies.  It  may 
be  the  oxygen  of  the  air  that  alters,  or  the  water,  or  more  pro- 
bably all  these  bodies ;  for  if  the  result  be  a  true  and  natural 
result  in  these  cases,  it  is  probably  common  to  all  substances. 
The  great  point  is,  that  the  three  bodies  concerned,  air,  water, 
and  the  subject  of  the  experiment,  alter  in  the  degree  of  their 
magnetic  relations  to  each  other ; — at  different  given  distances 
from  the  magnet  the  ratio  of  their  magnetic  power  does  not, 
according  to  the  experiments,  remain  the  same  ;  and  if  that  re- 
sult be  confirmed,  then  it  cannot  be  included  by  a  law  of  action 
which  is  inversely  as  the  square  of  the  distance.  A  hydrometer 
floating  in  a  fluid  and  subject  to  the  gravity  of  the  earth  alone, 
would  (other  things  being  the  same)  stand  at  the  same  point, 
whether  at  the  surface  of  the  earth,  or  removed  many  diameters 
of  the  earth  from  it,  because  the  action  of  gravity  is  inversely  as 
the  square  of  the  distance ;  but  if  we  suppose  the  substance  of 
the  hydrometer  and  the  fluid  to  differ  magnetically,  as  water  and 
bismuth  do,  and  the  earth  to  act  as  a  magnet  instead  of  by 
gravity,  then  the  hydrometer  would,  according  to  the  experi- 
ments, stand  at  a  different  point  for  different  distances,  and  if  so 
could  not  be  subject  to  the  former  law. 

The  cause  of  this  variation  in  the  ratio  of  the  substances  one 
to  another,  if  it  be  finally  proved,  has  still  to  be  searched  out. 
It  may  depend  in  some  manner  upon  the  forms  of  the  lines  of 
magnetic  force,  which  are  different  at  different  distances ;  or  not 
upon  the  forms  of  the  lines,  but  the  amount  of  power  at  the  dif- 
ferent distances ;  or  not  upon  the  mere  amount,  but  on  the  cir- 
cumstance that  in  every  case  the  body  submitted  to  experiment 
has  lines  of  different  degrees  of  force  passing  through  different 
parts  of  it  (for  however  different  the  magnetic  or  diamagnetic 
conditions  of  a  body  and  the  fluid  surrounding  it,  they  would 
not  move  at  all  in  relation  to  each  other  in  a  field  of  equal 
force) ;  but  whatever  be  the  cause,  it  will  be  a  concomitant  of 
magnetic  actions ;  and  therefore  ought  to  be  included  in  the  re- 
sults of  any  law  by  which  it  is  supposed  that  these  actions  are 
governed. 

It  has  not  yet  been  noticed  that  these  general  results  appear 
to  be  in  direct  opposition  to  those  of  Pliicker,  who  finds  that 
diamagnetic  power  increases  more  rapidly  than  magnetic  power 
with  increase  of  force.    But  such  a  circumstance,  if  both  con- 


506 


Magnetic  force  of  different  substances.    [Jan.  1853. 


elusions  be  accordant  with  facts,  only  shows  that  we  have  yet  a 
great  deal  to  learn  about  the  physical  nature  of  this  force ;  and 
we  must  not  shut  our  eyes  to  the  first  feeble  glimpses  of  these 
things,  because  they  are  inconsistent  on  both  sides  with  our 
assumed  laws  of  action ;  but  rather  seize  them,  as  hoping  that 
they  will  give  us  the  key  to  the  truth  of  nature.  Bodies  when 
subject  to  the  power  of  the  magnet  appear  to  acquire  a  new 
physical  state,  which  varies  with  the  distance  or  the  power  of 
the  magnet.  Each  body  may  have  its  own  rate  of  increase  and 
decrease ;  and  that  may  be  such  as  to  connect  the  extreme  effect 
of  Pliicker,  amongst  paramagnetic  bodies  on  the  one  hand,  and 
the  extreme  effects  amongst  diamagnetic  bodies  now  described, 
on  the  other ;  and  when  we  understand  all  this  rightly,  we  may 
see  the  apparent  contradiction  become  harmony,  though  it  may 
not  conform  to  the  law  of  the  inverse  square  of  the  distance  as 
we  now  try  to  apply  it. 

Pliicker  has  already  said,  because  of  his  observations  regarding 
paramagnetic  and  diamagnetic  force,  that  no  correct  list  of  mag- 
netic substances  can  be  given.  The  same  consequence  follows, 
though  in  a  different  direction,  from  what  has  now  been  stated, 
and  hence  the  reservation  before  made  (p.  501 ).  Still  the  former 
table  is  given  as  an  approximation,  and  it  may  be  useful  for  a 
time.  Before  leaving  this  first  account  of  recent  experimental 
researches,  it  may  be  as  well  to  state  that  they  are  felt  to  be  im- 
perfect and  may  perhaps  even  be  overturned ;  but  that,  as  such 
a  result  is  not  greatly  anticipated,  it  was  thought  well  to  present 
them  to  the  Members  of  the  Royal  Institution  and  the  scientific 
world,  if  peradventure  they  might  excite  criticism  and  experi- 
mental examination,  and  so  aid  in  advancing  the  cause  of  physical 
science. 

On  a  former  occasion  ^  the  existence  of  physical  lines  of  force 
in  relation  to  magnetism  and  electricity  was  inferred  from  the 
dual  nature  of  these  powers,  and  the  necessity  in  all  cases  and  at 
all  times  of  a  relation  and  dependence  between  the  polarities  of 
the  magnet,  or  the  positive  and  negative  electrical  surfaces. 
With  respect  to  gravity  a  more  hesitating  opinion  was  expressed, 
because  of  the  difficulty  of  observing  facts  having  any  relation 
to  time,  and  because  two  gravitating  particles  or  masses  did  not 
•  seem  to  have  any  necessary  dependence  on  each  other  for  the 

»  See  p.  438. 


Jan.  1853.] 


Physical  lines  of  force. 


507 


existence  or  excitement  of  their  mutual  power'.  A  passage 
may  now  be  quoted  from  Newton  which  has  since  been 
discovered  in  his  works,  and  which,  showing  that  he  was  an 
unhesitating  behever  in  physical  lines  of  gravitating  force, 
must  from  its  nature  rank  him  amongst  those  who  sustain  the 
physical  nature  of  the  lines  of  magnetic  and  electrical  force :  it 
is  as  follows,  in  words  written  to  Bentley^:  "  That  gravity  should 
be  innate,  inherent  and  essential  to  matter,  so  that  one  body  may 
act  upon  another  at  a  distance  through  a  vacuum,  without  the 
mediation  of  anything  else,  by  and  through  which  their  action 
and  force  may  be  conveyed  from  one  to  another,  is  to  me  so 
great  an  absurdity,  that  I  believe  no  man  who  has  in  philosophi- 
cal matters  a  competent  faculty  of  thinking,  can  ever  fall  into 
it.  Gravity  must  be  caused  by  an  agent  acting  constantly  ac- 
cording to  certain  laws  ;  but  whether  this  agent  be  material  or 
immaterial,  1  have  left  to  the  consideration  of  my  readers." 

'  Philosophical  Magazine,  4th  Series,  1852,  vol.  iii.  p.  403  (3246.). 
^Newton's  Works,  Horsley's  edition,  4to,  1783,  vol.  iv.  p.  438,  or  the 
Third  Letter  to  Bentley. 


508 


On  Electric  Induction — Associated  cases  of  current  and 

static  effects  ^. 

Certain  phaenomena  that  have  presented  themselves  in  the 
course  of  the  extraordinary  expansion  which  the  works  of  the 
Electric  Telegraph  Company  have  undergone,  appeared  to  me 
to  offer  remarkable  illustrations  of  some  fundamental  principles 
of  electricity,  and  strong  confirmation  of  the  truthfulness  of  the 
view  which  I  put  forth  sixteen  years  ago,  respecting  the  mu- 
tually dependent  nature  of  induction,  conduction,  and  insulation 
(Exp.  Res.,  1318.  &c.).  I  am  deeply  indebted  to  the  Company, 
to  the  Gutta  Percha  w^orks,  and  to  Mr.  Latimer  Clarke,  for 
the  facts;  and  also  for  the  opportunity  both  of  seeing  and 
showdng  them  well. 

Copper  wire  is  perfectly  covered  with  gutta  percha  at  the 
Company's  works,  the  metal  and  the  covering  being  in  every 
part  regular  and  concentric.    The  covered  wire  is  usually  made 
into  half-mile  lengths,  the  necessary  junctions  being  effected  by 
twisting  or  binding,  and  ultimately,  soldering ;  after  which  the 
place  is  covered  with  fine  gutta  percha,  in  such  a  manner  as  to 
make  the  coating  as  perfect  there  as  elsewhere :  the  perfection 
of  the  whole  operation  is  finally  tried  in  the  following  striking 
manner,  by  Mr.  Statham,  the  manager  of  the  works.    The  half- 
mile  coils  are  suspended  from  the  sides  of  barges  floating  in  a 
canal,  so  that  the  coils  are  immersed  in  the  water,  whilst  the  two 
ends  of  each  coil  rise  into  the  air :  as  many  as  200  coils  are  thus 
immersed  at  once,  and  when  their  ends  are  connected  in  series, 
one  great  length  of  100  miles  of  submerged  wire  is  produced, 
the  two  extremities  of  which  can  be  brought  into  a  room  for  ex- 
periment.   An  insulated  voltaic  battery  of  many  pairs  of  zinc 
and  copper,  with  dilute  sulphuric  acid,  has  one  end  connected 
with  the  earth,  and  the  other,  through  a  galvanometer,  with 
either  end  of  the  submerged  wire.    Passing  by  the  first  eflTect, 
and  continuing  the  contact,  it  is  evident  that  the  battery  current 
can  take  advantage  of  the  whole  accumulated  conduction  or  de- 
fective insulation  in  the  100  miles  of  gutta  percha  on  the  wire, 
and  that  whatever  portion  of  electricity  passes  through  to  the 

'  Proceedings  of  the  Royal  Institution,  Jan.  20,  1854. 


Jan.  1854.]     Charge  of  subaqueous  telegraph  wires.  509 

water  will  be  shown  by  the  galvanometer.  Now  the  battery  ie 
made  one  of  intensity,  in  order  to  raise  the  character  of"  the 
proof,  and  the  galvanometer  employed  is  of  considerable  deli- 
cacy; yet  so  high  is  the  insulation  that  the  deflection  is  not 
more  than  5°.  As  another  test  of  the  perfect  state  of  the  wire, 
when  the  two  ends  of  the  battery  are  connected  with  the  two 
ends  of  the  wire,  there  is  a  powerful  current  of  electricity  shown 
by  a  much  coarser  instrument;  but  when  any  one  junction  in 
the  course  of  the  100  miles  is  separated,  the  current  is  stopped, 
and  the  leak  or  deficiency  of  insulation  rendered  as  small  as  be- 
fore. The  perfection  and  condition  of  the  wire  may  be  judged 
of  by  these  facts. 

The  100  miles,  by  means  of  which  I  saw  the  phaenomena, 
were  thus  good  as  to  insulation.   The  copper  wire  was  yV^^ 
inch  in  diameter: — the  covered  wire  was  j"^;  some  was  a  little 
less,  being  diameter : — the  gutta  percha  on  the  metal  may 

therefore  be  considered  as  O'l  of  an  inch  in  thickness.  100 
miles  of  like  covered  wire  in  coils  were  heaped  up  oa  the  floor 
of  a  dry  warehouse  and  connected  in  one  series,  for  comparison 
with  that  under  water. 

Consider  now  an  insulated  battery  of  360  pairs  of  plates  (4x3 
inches)  having  one  extremity  to  the  earth ;  the  water  wire  with 
both  its  insulated  ends  in  the  room,  and  a  good  earth-discharge 
wire  ready  for  the  requisite  communications: — when  the  free 
battery  end  was  placed  in  contact  with  the  water  wire  and  then 
removed,  and,  afterwards,  a  person  touching  the  earth-discharge 
touched  also  the  wire,  he  received  a  powerful  shock.  The  shock 
was  rather  that  of  a  voltaic  than  of  a  Leyden  battery :  it  occu- 
pied time,  and  by  quick  tapping  touches  could  be  divided  into 
numerous  small  shocks :  I  obtained  as  many  as  forty  sensible 
shocks  from  one  charge  of  the  wire.  If  time  were  allowed  to 
intervene  between  the  charge  and  discharge  of  the  wire,  the 
shock  was  less ;  but  it  was  sensible  after  2,  3,  or  4  minutes,  or 
even  a  longer  period. 

When,  after  the  wire  had  been  in  contact  with  the  battery,  it 
was  placed  in  contact  with  a  Statham's  fuse,  it  ignited  the  fuse 
(or  even  six  fuses  in  succession)  vividly : — it  could  ignite  the  fuse 
3  or  4  seconds  after  separation  from  the  "battery.  When,  having 
been  in  contact  with  the  battery,  it  was  separated  and  placed  in 
contact  with  a  galvanometer,  it  affected  the  instrument  very 
powerfully :  it  acted  on  it,  though  less  powerfully,  after  the  lapse 


510  Subaqueous  telegraph  wires : —        [Jan.  1854. 

of  4  or  5  minutes,  and  even  affected  it  sensibly  20  or  30 
minutes  after  it  had  been  separated  from  the  battery.  When 
the  insulated  galvanometer  was  permanently  attached  to  the  end 
of  the  water  wire,  and  the  battery  pole  was  brought  in  contact 
with  the  free  end  of  the  instrument,  it  was  most  instructive  to 
see  the  great  rush  of  electricity  into  the  wire;  yet  after  that  was 
over,  though  the  contact  was  continued,  the  deflection  was  not 
more  than  5°,  so  high  was  the  insulation.  Then  separating  the 
battery  from  the  galvanometer,  and  touching  the  latter  with  the 
earth  wire,  it  was  just  as  striking  to  see  the  electricity  rush  out 
of  the  wire,  holding  for  a  time  the  magnet  of  the  instrument  in 
the  reverse  direction  to  that  due  to  the  ingress  or  charge. 

These  effects  were  produced  equally  well  with  either  pole  of  the 
battery  or  with  either  end  of  the  wire ;  and  whether  the  electric 
condition  was  conferred  and  withdrawn  at  the  same  end,  or  at  the 
opposite  ends  of  the  100  miles,  made  no  difference  in  the  results. 
An  intensity  battery  was  required,  for  reasons  which  wiU  be  very 
evident  in  the  sequel.  That  employed  was  able  to  decompose 
only  a  very  small  quantity  of  water  in  a  given  time.  A  Grove's 
battery  of  eight  or  ten  pair  of  plates,  which  would  have  far  sur- 
passed it  in  this  respect,  would  have  had  scarcely  a  sensible  power 

in  affecting  the  wire.  ^ 

When  the  100  miles  of  wire  in  the  air  were  expenmented  with 
in  like  manner,  not  the  shghtest  signs  of  any  of  these  effects  were 
produced.  There  is  reason,  from  principle,  to  beheve  that  an 
infinitesimal  result  is  obtainable,  but  as  compared  to  the  water 
wire  the  action  was  nothing.  Yet  the  wire  was  equally  well  and 
better  insulated,  and  as  regarded  a  constant  current,  it  was  an 
equally  good  conductor.  This  point  was  ascertained,  by  attach- 
ing the  end  of  the  water  wire  to  one  galvanometer,  and  the  end 
of  the  air  wire  to  another  like  instrument ;  the  two  other  ends  of 
the  wires  were  fastened  together,  and  to  the  earth  contact;  the 
two  free  galvanometer  ends  were  fastened  together,  and  to  the 
free  pole  of  the  battery;  in  this  manner  the  current  was  di- 
vided between  the  air  and  water  wires,  but  the  galvanometers 
were  affected  to  precisely  the  same  amount.  To  make  the 
result  more  certain,  these  instruments  were  changed  one  for  the 
other,  but  the  deviations  were  still  ahke;  so  that  the  two  wires 
conducted  with  equal  facility. 

The  cause  of  the  first  results  is,  upon  consideration,  evident 
enough.    In  consequence  of  the  perfection  of  the  workmanship. 


Jan.  1854.] 


iheir  charge — wireii  in  air. 


.511 


a  Leyden  arrangement  is  produced  upon  a  large  scale ;  the  cop- 
per wire  becomes  charged  statically  with  that  electricity  which 
the  pole  of  the  battery  connected  with  it  can  supply^ ;  it  acts  by 
induction  through  the  gutta  percha  (without  which  induction  it 
could  not  itself  become  charged,  Exp.  Res.  1177-),  producing 
the  opposite  state  on  the  surface  of  the  water  touching  the  gutta 
pei'cha,  which  forms  the  outer  coating  of  this  curious  arrange- 
ment. The  gutta  percha  across  which  the  induction  occurs,  is 
only  0*1  of  an  inch  thick,  and  the  extent  of  the  coating  is  enor- 
mous. The  surface  of  the  copper  wire  is  nearly  8300  square 
feet,  and  the  surface  of  the  outer  coating  of  water  is  four  times 
that  amount,  or  33,000  square  feet.  Hence  the  striking  charac- 
ter of  the  results.  The  intensity  of  the  static  charge  acquired  is 
only  equal  to  the  intensity  at  the  pole  of  the  battery  whence  it 
is  derived  ;  but  its  quantity  is  enormous,  because  of  the  immense 
extent  of  the  Leyden  arrangement ;  and  hence  when  the  wire  is 
separated  from  the  battery  and  the  charge  employed,  it  has  all 
the  powers  of  a  considerable  voltaic  current,  and  gives  results 
vi'hich  the  best  ordinary  electric  machines  and  Leyden  arrange- 
ments cannot  as  yet  approach. 

That  the  air  wire  produces  none  of  these  effects  is  simply 
because  there  is  no  outer  coating  correspondent  to  the  water,  or 
only  one  so  far  removed  as  to  allow  of  no  sensible  induction,  and 
therefore  the  inner  wire  cannot  become  charged.  In  the  air  wire 
of  the  warehouse,  the  floor,  walls,  and  ceiling,  of  the  place  con- 
stituted the  outer  coating,  and  this  was  at  a  considerable  distance  ; 
and  in  any  case  could  only  affect  the  outside  portions  of  the  coils  * 
of  wire.  I  understand  that  100  miles  of  wire  stretched  in  a  line 
through  the  air,  so  as  to  have  its  whole  extent  opposed  to  earth, 
is  equally  inefficient  in  showing  the  effects,  and  there  it  must  be 
the  distance  of  the  inductric  and  inducteous  surfaces  (1483.), 
combined  with  the  lower  specific  inductive  capacity  of  air,  as 
compared  with  gutta  percha,  which  causes  the  negative  result. 
The  phsenomena  altogether  offer  a  beautiful  case  of  the  identity 
of  static  and  dynamic  electricity.  The  whole  power  of  a  consi- 
derable battery  may  in  this  way  be  worked  off  in  separate  por- 
tions, and  measured  out  in  units  of  static  force,  and  yet  be  em- 
ployed afterwards  for  any  or  every  purpose  of  voltaic  electricity. 

I  now  proceed  to  further  consequences  of  associated  static  and 
'  Davy,  Elements  of  Chemical  Philosophy,  p.  154. 


512  Subterraneous  telegra2Jh  wires : —    [Jan.  1854. 

dynamic  effects.   Wires  covered  with  gutta  percha,  and  then  en- 
closed in  tubes  of  lead  or  of  iron,  or  buried  in  the  earth,  or  sunk 
in  the  sea,  exhibit  the  same  pheenomena  as  those  described ;  the 
like  static  inductive  action  being  in  all  these  cases  permitted  by 
the  conditions.   Such  subterraneous  wires  exist  between  London 
and  Manchester,  and  when  they  are  all  connected  together  so  as 
to  make  one  series,  offer  above  1500  miles ;  which,  as  the  dupli- 
cations return  to  London,  can  be  observed  by  one  experimenter 
at  intervals  of  about  400  miles,  by  the  introduction  of  galvano- 
meters at  these  returns.    This  wire,  or  the  half,  or  fourth  of  it, 
presented  all  the  phsenomena  already  described;  the  only  dif- 
ference was,  that  as  the  insulation  was  not  so  perfect,  the  charged 
condition  fell  more  rapidly.    Consider  750  miles  of  the  wire  in 
one  length,  a  galvanometer  a  being  at  the  beginning  of  the  M'ire, 
a  second  galvanometer  b  in  the  middle,  and  a  third  c  at  the  end : 
— these  three  galvanometers  being  in  the  room  with  the  experi- 
menter, and  the  third  c  perfectly  connected  with  the  earth.  On 
bringing  the  pole  of  the  battery  into  contact  with  the  wire  through 
the  galvanometer  a,  that  instrument  was  instantly  affected ;  after 
a  sensible  time  b  was  affected,  and  after  a  still  longer  time  c : 
when  the  whole  1500  miles  were  included,  it  required  two  seconds 
for  the  electric  stream  to  reach  the  last  instrument.  Again; 
all  the  instruments  being  deflected  (of  course  not  equally  because 
of  the  electric  leakage  along  the  line),  if  the  battery  were  cut  off 
at  a,  that  instrument  instantly  fell  to  zero ;  but  b  did  not  fall 
until  a  little  while  after ;  and  c  only  after  a  still  longer  interval  ;— 
a  current  flowing  on  to  the  end  of  the  wire  whilst  there  was  none 
flowing  in  at  the  beginning.    Again ;  by  a  short  touch  of  the 
battery  pole  against  a,  it  could  be  deflected  and  could  fall  back 
into  its  neutral  condition,  before  the  electric  power  had  reached  b  ; 
which  in  its  turn  would  be  for  an  instant  affected,  and  then  left 
neutral  before  the  power  had  reached  c;  a  wave  of  force  having 
been  sent  into  the  wire  which  gradually  travelled  along  it,  and 
made  itself  evident  at  successive  intervals  of  time,  in  different 
parts  of  the  wire.    It  was  even  possible,  by  adjusted  touches  of 
the  battery,  to  have  two  simultaneous  waves  in  the  wire,  follow- 
ing each  other,  so  that  at  the  same  moment  that  c  was  affected 
by  the  first  wave,  a  or  b  was  affected  by  the  second ;  and  there 
is  no  doubt  that  by  the  multiplication  of  instruments  and  close 
attention,  four  or  five  waves  might  be  obtained  at  once. 


Jan.  1854.]     retardation  of  the  current  in  them. 


513 


If  after  making  and  breaking  battery  contact  at  a,  a  be  imme- 
diately connected  with  the  earth,  then  additional  interesting 
effects  occur.  Part  of  the  electricity  which  is  in  the  wire  will 
return,  and  passing  through  a  will  deflect  it  in  the  reverse  di- 
rection; so  that  currents  will  flow  out  of  both  extremities  of  the 
wire  in  opposite  directions,  whilst  no  current  is  going  into  it 
from  any  source.  Or  if  a  be  quickly  put  to  the  battery  and  then 
to  the  earth,  it  will  show  a  current  first  entering  into  the  wire, 
and  then  returning  out  of  the  wire  at  the  same  place ;  no  sensible 
part  of  it  ever  travelling  on  to  b  or  c. 

When  an  air  wire  of  equal  extent  is  experimented  with  in  like 
manner,  no  such  effects  as  these  are  perceived :  or  if,  guided  by 
principle,  the  arrangements  are  such  as  to  be  searching,  they  are 
perceived  only  in  a  very  slight  degree,  and  disappear  in  compa- 
rison with  the  former  gross  results.  The  eflfect  at  the  end  of 
the  very  long  air  wire  (or  c)  is  in  the  smallest  degree  behind  the 
effect  at  galvanometer  a ;  and  the  accumulation  of  a  charge  in  the 
wire  is  not  sensible. 

All  these  results  as  to  time,  &c.  evidently  depend  upon  the 
same  condition  as  that  which  produced  the  former  effect  of  static 
charge,  namely  lateral  induction;  and  are  necessary  consequences 
of  the  principles  of  conduction,  insulation,  and  induction,  three 
terms  which  in  their  meaning  are  inseparable  from  each  other 
(Exp.  Res.  1320.  1326 1338.  1561.  &c.).  If  we  put  a  plate  of 
shell-lac  upon  a  gold-leaf  electrometer  and  a  charged  carrier  (an 
insulated  metal  ball  of  two  or  three  inches  diameter)  upon  it,  the 
electrometer  is  diverged ;  removing  the  carrier,  this  divergence 

*  1326.  All  these  considerations  impress  my  mind  strongly  with  the  con- 
viction, that  insulation  and  ordinary  conduction  cannot  be  properly  separated 
when  we  are  examining  into  their  nature ;  that  is,  into  the  general  law  or  laws 
under  which  their  phsenomena  are  produced.  They  appear  to  me  to  consist  in 
an  action  of  contiguous  particles,  dependent  on  the  forces  developed  in  electrical 
excitement ;  these  forces  bring  the  particles  into  a  state  of  tension  or  polarity, 
which  constitutes  both  induction  and  insulation ;  and  being  in  this  state  the  con- 
tiguous particles  have  a  power  or  capability  of  communicating  these  forces, 
one  to  the  other,  by  which  they  are  lowered  and  discharge  occurs.  Every  body 
appears  to  discharge  (444.  987) ;  but  the  possession  of  this  capability  in  a  greater 
or  smaller  degree  in  different  bodies,  makes  them  better  or  worse  conductors, 
worse  or  better  insulators  :  and  both  induction  and  conduction  appear  to  be  the 
same  in  their  principle  and  action  (1320.),  except  that  in  the  latter,  an  effect 
common  to  both  is  raised  to  the  highest  degree,  whereas  in  the  former,  it  occurs 
in  the  best  cases,  in  only  an  almost  insensible  quantity. 

VOL.  nr.  2  l 


514    Electric  induction  and  conduction  connected.   [Jan.  1854. 

instantly  falls;  this  is  insulation  and  induction:  if  we  replace  the 
shell-lac  by  metal,  the  carrier  causes  the  leaves  to  diverge  as  be- 
fore, but  when  removed,  though  after  the  shortest  possible  con- 
tact, the  electroscope  is  left  diverged  ;  this  is  conduction.  If  we 
employ  a  plate  of  spermaceti  instead  of  the  metal,  and  repeat  the 
experiment,  we  find  the  divergence  partly  falls  and  partly  remains, 
because  the  spermaceti  insulates  and  also  conducts,  doing  both 
imperfectly;  but  the  shell-lac  also  conducts,  as  is  shown  if 
time  be  allowed ;  and  the  metal  also  obstructs  conduction,  and 
therefore  insulates,  as  is  shown  by  simple  arrangements.  For  if 
a  copper  wire,  74  feet  in  length  and  y^^th  of  an  inch  in  diameter, 
be  insulated  in  the  air,  having  its  end  m  a 
metal  ball ;  its  end  e  connected  with  the 
earth,  and  the  parts  near  m  and  e  brought 
within  half  an  inch  of  each  other,  as  at  5; 
then  an  ordinary  Leyden  jar  being  charged 
sufficiently,  its  outside  connected  with  e  and 
its  inside  with  m,  will  give  a  charge  to  the 
wire,  which  instead  of  travelling  wholly 
through  it,  though  it  be  so  excellent  a  con- 
ductor, will  pass  in  large  proportion  through 
the  air  at  s,  as  a  bright  spark ;  for  with  such 
a  length  of  wire,  the  resistance  in  it  is  accu- 
mulated until  it  becomes  as  much,  or  perhaps 
even  more,  than  that  of  the  air,  for  electricity 
of  such  high  intensity. 

Admitting  that  such  and  similar  experiments  show  that  con- 
duction through  a  wire  is  preceded  by  the  act  of  induction  (1338.), 
then  all  the  phsenomena  presented  by  the  submerged  or  subter- 
ranean wires  are  explained ;  and  in  their  explanation  confirm,  as 
I  think,  the  principles  given.  After  Mr.  Wheatstone  had,  in 
1834,  measured  the  velocity  of  a  wave  of  electricit}'-  through  a 
copper  wire,  and  given  it  as  288,000  miles  in  a  second,  I  said, 
in  1838,  upon  the  strength  of  these  principles  (1333.),  "  ihdX  the 
velocity  of  discharge  through  the  same  wire  may  be  greatly 
varied,  by  attending  to  the  circumstances  which  cause  variations 
of  discharge  through  spermaceti  or  sulphur.  Thus,  for  instance, 
it  must  vary  with  the  tension  or  intensity  of  the  first  urging 
force,  which  tension  is  charge  and  induction.  So  if  the  two 
ends  of  the  wire  in  Professor  Whcatstone's  experiment  were  im- 


o  n 


Jan.  1854.]     Varying  velocity  of  electricity  in  wires.  515 

mediately  connected  Math  two  large  insulated  metallic  surfaces 
exposed  to  the  air,  so  that  the  primary  act  of  induction,  after 
making  the  contact  for  discharge,  might  be  in  part  removed  from 
the  internal  portion  of  the  wire  at  the  first  instant,  and  disposed 
for  the  moment  on  its  surface  jointly  with  the  air  and  surround- 
ing conductors,  then  I  venture  to  anticipate  that  the  middle 
spark  would  be  more  retarded  than  before :  and  if  these  two 
plates  were  the  inner  and  outer  coating  of  a  large  jar,  or  a  Leyden 
battery,  then  the  retardation  of  that  spark  would  be  still  greater." 
Now  this  is  precisely  the  case  of  the  submerged  or  subterraneous 
wires,  except  that  instead  of  carrjang  their  surfaces  towards  the 
inducteous  coatings  (1483.),  the  latter  are  brought  near  the 
former;  in  both  cases  the  induction  consequent  upon  charge, 
instead  of  being  exerted  almost  entirely  at  the  moment  within 
the  wire,  is  to  a  very  large  extent  determined  externally ;  and  so 
the  discharge  or  conduction  being  caused  by  a  lower  tension, 
therefore  requires  a  longer  time.  Hence  the  reason  why,  with 
1500  miles  of  subterraneous  wire,  the  vrave  was  two  seconds  in 
passing  from  end  to  end ;  whilst  with  the  same  length  of  air  wire, 
the  time  was  almost  inappreciable. 

With  these  lights  it  is  interesting  to  look  at  the  measured 
velocities  of  electricity  in  wires  of  metal,  as  given  by  difierent 
experimenters. 

Miles  per  second. 

'  Wheatstone  in  1834,  with  copper  wire  made  it  .  288,000 
^  Walker  in  America  with  telegraph  iron  wire  .  .  18,780 
1  O'Mitchell,  ditto  ditto  .    .  28,524 

'  Fizeau  and  Gonnelle  (copper  wire)  112,680 

^  Ditto  (iron  wire)   62,600 

^  A.  B.  G.  (copper)  London  and  Brussels  Telegraph  2,700 
^    Ditto     (copper)  London  and  Edinburgh  Telegraph  7,600 

Here,  the  difference  in  copper  is  seen  by  the  first  and  fifth 
result  to  be  above  a  hundredfold.  It  is  further  remarked  in 
Liebig's  report  of  Fizeau's  and  Gonnelle's  experiments,  that  the 
velocity  is  not  proportional  to  the  conductive  capacity,  and  is 
independent  of  the  thickness  of  the  wire.  All  these  circum- 
stances and  incompatibilities  appear  rapidly  to  vanish,  as  we 
recognise  and  take  into  consideration  the  lateral  induction  of  the 

'  Liebig  and  Kopp's  report,  1850  (translated),  p.  168. 
*  Athenseum,  14th  January,  1854,  p.  54. 

2  L  2 


51Q 


Subaqueous  telegraph  wires. 


[Jan.  1854. 


wire  carrying  the  current.  If  the  velocity  of  a  brief  electric  dis- 
charge is  to  be  ascertained  in  a  given  length  of  wire,  the  simple 
circumstances  of  the  latter  being  twined  round  a  frame  in  small 
space,  or  spread  through  the  air  through  a  large  space,  or  ad- 
hering to  walls,  or  lying  on  the  ground,  will  make  a  difference 
in  the  results.  And  in  regard  to  long  circuits  such  as  those 
described,  their  conducting  power  cannot  be  understood,  whilst 
no  reference  is  made  to  their  lateral  static  induction,  or  to  the 
conditions  of  intensity  and  quantity  which  then  come  into  play ; 
especially  in  the  case  of  short  or  intermitting  currents,  for  then 
static  and  dynamic  are  continually  passing  into  each  other. 

It  has  already  been  said  that  the  conducting  power  of  the  air 
and  water  wires  is  alike  for  a  constant  current.  This  is  in 
perfect  accordance  with  the  principles  and  with  the  definite 
character  of  the  electric  force,  whether  in  the  static  or  current  or 
transition  state.  When  a  voltaic  current  of  a  certain  intensity 
is  sent  into  a  long  water  wire,  connected  at  the  further  extremity 
with  the  earth,  part  of  the  force  is  in  the  first  instance  occupied 
in  raising  a  lateral  induction  round  the  wire,  ultimately  equal  in 
intensity  at  the  near  end  to  the  intensity  of  the  battery  stream, 
and  decreasing  gradually  to  the  earth  end,  where  it  becomes 
nothing.  Whilst  this  induction  is  rising,  that  within  the  wire 
amongst  its  particles  is  beneath  what  it  would  otherwise  be ;  but 
as  soon  as  the  first  has  attained  its  maximum  state,  then  that  in 
the  wire  becomes  proportionate  to  the  battery  intensity,  and 
therefore  equals  that  in  the  air  wire,  in  M'hich  the  same  state  is 
(because  of  the  absence  of  lateral  induction)  almost  instantly 
attained.  Then  of  course  they  discharge  alike  and  therefore 
conduct  alike. 

A  striking  proof  of  the  variation  of  the  conduction  of  a  wire 
by  variation  of  its  lateral  static  induction,  is  given  in  the  expe- 
riment proposed  sixteen  years  ago  (1333.).  If,  using  a  constant 
charged  jar,  the  interval  s,  page  514,  be  adjusted  so  that  the  spark 
shall  freely  pass  there  (though  it  would  not  if  a  little  wider), 
whilst  the  short  connecting  wires  n  and  o  are  insulate^^in  the  air, 
the  experiment  may  be  repeated  twenty  times  without  a  single 
failure ;  but  if  after  that,  n  and  o  be  connected  with  the  inside 
and  outside  of  an  insulated  Leyden  jar,  as  described,  the  spark 
will  never  pass  across  s,  but  all  the  charge  will  go  round  the 
whole  of  the  long  wire.    Why  is  this  ?    The  quantity  of  electri- 


Jan.  1854.]        Subterraneous  telegraph  wires. 


517 


city  is  the  same,  the  wire  is  the  same,  its  resistance  is  the  same, 
and  that  of  the  air  remains  unaltered ;  but  because  the  intensity- 
is  lowered,  through  the  lateral  induction  momentarily  allowed, 
it  is  never  enough  to  strike  across  the  air  at  s ;  and  it  is  finally 
altogether  occupied  in  the  wire,  which  in  a  little  longer  time  than 
before,  elfects  the  whole  discharge.  M.  Fizeau  has  applied  the 
same  expedient  to  the  primary  voltaic  currents  of  Rhumkorff's 
beautiful  inducting  apparatus,  with  great  advantage.  He  thereby 
reduces  the  intensity  of  these  currents  at  the  moment  when  it 
would  be  very  disadvantageous,  and  gives  us  a  striking  instance 
of  the  advantage  of  viewing  static  and  dynamic  phaenomena  as 
the  result  of  the  same  laws. 

Mr.  Clarke  arranged  a  Bains'  printing  telegraph  with  three 
pens,  so  that  it  gave  beautiful  illustrations  and  records  of  facts 
like  those  stated :  the  pens  are  iron  wires,  under  which  a  band 
of  paper  imbued  with  ferro-prussiate  of  potassa  passes  at  a  regu- 
lar rate  by  clock-work ;  and  thus  regular  lines  of  prussian  blue 
are  produced  whenever  a  current  is  transmitted,  and  the  time  of 
the  current  is  recorded.  In  the  case  to  be  described,  the  three 
lines  were  side  by  side,  and  about  0*1  of  an  inch  apart.  The  pen 
m  belonged  to  a  circuit  of  only  a  few  feet  of  wire,  and  a  separate 
battery ;  it  told  whenever  the  contact  key  was  put  down  by  the 
finger ;  the  pen  n  was  at  the  earth  end  of  the  long  air  wire,  and 
the  pen  o  at  the  earth  end  of  the  long  subterraneous  wire ;  and 
by  arrangement,  the  key  could  be  made  to  throw  the  electricity 
of  the  chief  battery  into  either  of  these  wires,  simultaneously 
with  the  passage  of  the  short  circuit  current  through  pen  m. 
When  pens  m  and  n  were  in  action,  the  m  record  was  a  regular 
line  of  equal  thickness,  showing  by  its  length  the  actual  time 
during  which  the  electricity  flowed  into  the  wires ;  and  the  n 
record  was  an  equally  regular  line,  parallel  to,  and  of  equal 
length  with  the  former,  but  the  least  degree  behind  it;  thus  in- 
dicating that  the  long  air  wire  conveyed  its  electric  current  almost 
instantaneously  to  the  further  end.  But  when  pens  m  and  o 
were  in  action,  the  o  line  did  not  begin  until  some  time  after  the 
m  line,  and  it  continued  after  the  m  line  had  ceased,  i.  e.  after  the 
0  battery  was  cut  ofl;  Furthermore,  it  was  faint  at  first,  grew 
up  to  a  maximum  of  intensity,  continued  at  that  as  long  as 
battery  contact  was  continued,  and  then  gradually  diminished  to 
nothing.    Thus  the  record  o  showed  that  the  wave  of  powei 


Subterraneous  telegraph  wires.       [Jan.  1854. 

took  time  in  the  water  wire  to  reach  the  further  extremity ;  by 
its  first  faintness,  it  showed  that  power  was  consumed  in  the  ex- 
ertion of  lateral  static  induction  along  the  wire  ;  by  the  attainment 
of  a  maximum  and  the  after  equahty,  it  showed  when  this  induc- 
tion had  become  proportionate  to  the  intensity  of  the  battery 
current ;  by  its  beginning  to  diminish,  it  showed  when  the  bat- 
tery current  was  cut  off;  and  its  prolongation  and  gradual  dimi- 
nution showed  the  time  of  the  outflow  of  the  static  electricity 
laid  up  in  the  wire,  and  the  consequent  regular  falling  of  the 
induction  which  had  been  as  regularly  raised. 

With  the  pens  m  and  o  the  conversion  of  an  intermitting  into 
a  continuous  current  could  be  beautifully  shown ;  the  earth  wire 
by  the  static  induction  which  it  permitted,  acting  in  a  manner 
analogous  to  the  fly-wheel  of  a  steam-engine,  or  the  air-spring  of 
a  pump.  Thus  when  the  contact  key  was  regularly  but  rapidly 
depressed  and  raised,  the  pen  m  made  a  series  of  short  lines 
separated  by  intervals  of  equal  length.  After  four  or  more  of 
these  had  passed,  then  pen  o,  belonging  to  the  subterraneous 
wire,  began  to  make  its  mark,  weak  at  first,  then  rising  to  a 
maximum,  but  always  continuous.  If  the  action  of  the  contact 
key  was  less  rapid,  then  alternate  thickening  and  attenuations 
appeared  in  the  o  record ;  and  if  the  introductions  of  the  electric 
current  at  the  one  end  of  the  earth  wire  were  at  still  longer  in- 
tervals, the  records  of  action  at  the  other  end  became  entirely 
separated  from  each  other; — all  showing  most  beautifully,  how 
the  individual  current  or  wave,  once  introduced  into  the  wire, 
and  never  ceasing  to  go  onward  in  its  course,  could  be  affected 
in  its  intensity,  its  time,  and  other  circumstances,  by  its  partial 
occupation  in  static  induction. 

By  other  arrangements  of  the  pens  n  and  o,  the  near  end  of 
the  subterraneous  wire  could  be  connected  with  the  earth  imme- 
diately after  separation  from  the  battery  ;  and  then  the  back  flow 
of  the  electricity,  and  the  time  and  manner  thereof,  were  beauti- 
fully recorded;  but  I  must  refrain  from  detaihng  results  which 
have  already  been  described  in  principle. 

Many  variations  of  these  experiments  have  been  made  and 
may  be  devised.  Thus  the  ends  of  the  insulated  battery  have 
been  attached  to  the  ends  of  the  long  subterraneous  wire,  and 
then  the  two  halves  of  the  wire  have  given  back  opposite  return 
currents  when  connected  with  the  earth.    In  such  a  case  the 


Jan.  1854.]  Intensity  and  quantity.  519 

wire  is  positive  and  negative  at  the  two  extremities,  being  per- 
manently sustained  by  its  length  and  the  battery,  in  the  same 
condition  which  is  given  to  the  short  wire  for  a  moment  by  the 
Leyden  discharge,  p.  5 14 ;  or,  for  an  extreme  but  like  case,  to  a 
filament  of  shell-lac  having  its  extremities  charged  positive  and 
negative.  Coulomb  pointed  out  the  difference  of  long  and  short 
as  to  the  insulating  or  conducting  power  of  such  filaments,  and 
the  like  difference  occurs  with  long  and  short  metal  wires. 

The  character  of  the  phagnomena  described  in  this  report, 
induces  me  to  refer  to  the  terms  intensity  and  quantity  as  apphed 
to  electricity ;  terms  which  I  have  had  such  frequent  occasion  to 
employ.  These  terms,  or  equivalents  for  them,  cannot  be  dis- 
pensed with  by  those  who  study  both  the  static  and  the  dynamic 
relations  of  electricity ;  every  current  where  there  is  resistance, 
has  the  static  element  and  induction  involved  in  it,  whilst  every 
case  of  insulation  has  more  or  less  of  the  dynamic  element  and 
conduction ;  and  we  have  seen  that  with  the  same  voltaic  source, 
the  same  current  in  the  same  length  of  the  same  wire,  gives  a 
different  result  as  the  intensity  is  made  to  vary,  with  variations 
of  the  induction  around  the  wire.  The  idea  of  intensity  or  the 
power  of  overcoming  resistance,  is  as  necessary  to  that  of  elec- 
tricity, either  static  or  current,  as  the  idea  of  pressure  is  to 
steam  in  a  boiler,  or  to  air  passing  through  apertures  or  tubes ; 
and  we  must  have  language  competent  to  express  these  condi- 
tions and  these  ideas.  Furthermore,  I  have  never  found  either 
of  these  terms  lead  to  any  mistakes  regarding  electrical  action, 
or  give  rise  to  any  false  view  of  the  character  of  electricity  or  its 
unity.  I  cannot  find  other  terms  of  equally  useful  significance 
with  these ;  or  any  which,  conveying  the  same  ideas,  are  not 
liable  to  such  misuse  as  these  may  be  subject  to.  It  would  be 
affectation,  therefore,  in  me  to  search  about  for  other  words ; 
and  besides  that,  the  present  subject  has  shown  me  more  than 
ever  their  great  value  and  peculiar  advantage  in  electrical  lan- 
guage.   

The  fuse  referred  to  in  page  509,  is  of  the  following  nature. 
Some  copper  wire  was  covered  with  sulphuretted  gutta  percha ; 
after  some  months  it  was  found  that  a  film  of  sulphuret  of 
copper  was  formed  between  the  metal  and  the  envelope ;  and 
further,  that  when  half  the  gutta  percha  was  cut  away  in  any 


520 


Statkam's  electric  fuse  for  mines.    [Jan.  1854. 


place,  and  then  the  copper  wire  removed  for  about  ^  of  an  inch, 
so  as  to  remain  connected  only  by  the  film  of  sulphuret  ad- 
hering to  the  remaining  gutta  percha,  an  intensity  battery  could 
cause  this  sulphuret  to  enter  into  vivid  ignition,  and  fire  gun- 
powder with  the  utmost  ease.  Gunpowder  was  fired  with 
certainty  at  the  end  of  eight  miles  of  single  wire;  and  also 
through  100  miles  of  covered  wire  immersed  in  the  canal,  by  the 
use  of  this  fuse. 


521 


On  Subterraneous  Electro-Telegraph  Wires'^. 
To  the  Editors  of  the  Philosophical  Magazine  and  Journal. 
Gentlemen, 

A  COMMUNICATION  has  been  just  brought  to  my  notice  on  some 
remarkable  phaenomena  presented  by  subterraneous  electro-tele- 
graph wu-es  observed  and  described  by  M.  Werner  Siemens  of 
BerHn,  in  a  communication  bearing  date  April  15,  1850.  They 
are  the  same  phaenomena  as  those  shown  to  me  by  Mr.  Latimer 
Clarke,  and  used  in  my  communication  (inserted  in  your  Maga- 
zinefor  March  1854,  p.  197)  as  illustrations  of  the  truth  of  my  an- 
cient views  of  the  nature  of  insulation,  induction  and  conduction. 
It  is  only  justice  that  I  should  refer  to  them;  and  I  think  they 
are  so  interesting,  that  you  will  be  willing  to  reprint  the  account, 
very  slightly  abbreviated,  which  I  send  you :  the  effects  are  pro- 
duced with  wires  covered  with  gutta  percha  and  laid  in  the 
earth. 

"A  very  remarkable  phgenomenon  is  constantly  observed  on 
long,  well-insulated  telegraphic  lines.  Suppose  one  extremity, 
B,  of  the  wire  be  insulated,  and  the  other.  A,  be  connected  with 
one  pole  of  a  battery  of  which  the  other  touches  the  earth ;  at 
the  instant  of  communication  a  brief  current  is  observed  in  the 
near  parts  of  the  wire  in  the  same  direction  as  the  instantaneous 
cun-ent  which  would  exist  if  the  extremity  B  were  connected  with 
the  earth  ;  on  lines  of  perfect  insulation  no  trace  of  this  current 
remains.  Suddenly  replacing,  through  the  action  of  a  commu- 
tator, the  battery  by  an  earth  conductor,  a  second  instantaneous 
current  is  obtained  of  an  intensity  nearly  equal  to  the  first,  but 
in  the  inverse  direction.  Finally,  breaking  the  communication 
of  A  with  the  battery  and  also  the  earth,  so  as  to  insulate  this 
extremity,  and  uniting  the  end  B  at  the  same  instant  with  the 
ground,  an  instantaneous  current  is  observed  nearly  equal  in  in- 
tensity to  the  former,  and  this  time  in  the  same  direction  as  the 
first,  i.  e.  as  the  continuous  current  of  the  battery.  This  last 
experiment  can  only  be  made  on  a  double  subterranean  line 
having  the  two  extremities  A  and  B  at  the  same  station.  One 
might  at  first  sight  suppose  these  pha2nomena  to  be  due  to 

'  From  the  Philosophical  Magazine  for  June  1854. 


522 


Subterraneous  telegraph  wires.     [April  1854. 


secondary  polarities  developed  on  the  wire,  but  many  facts  oppose 
such  a  conclusion.  1.  The  phaenomena  are  more  striking  as  the 
wire  is  better  insulated.  2.  The  currents  are  much  more  brief 
than  those  due  to  secondary  polarities.  3.  Their  intensity  is 
proportional  to  the  force  of  the  battery,  and  independent  of  the 
intensity  of  any  derived  current  that  may  occur  in  consequence 
of  imperfect  insulation;  it  follows  that  the  intensity  of  the  in- 
stantaneous currents  can  greatly  surpass  the  maximum  intensity 
which  secondary  currents  in  the  same  circuit  could  acquire. 
4.  Finally,  the  intensity  of  the  instantaneous  currents  is  propor- 
tional to  the  length  of  the  wire,  whilst  an  inverse  relation  ought 
to  occur  if  the  currents  were  due  to  secondary  polarities. 

"The  phsenomena  are  easily  comprehended  if  we  recall  the 
beautiful  experiment  by  which  Volta  furnished  the  most  striking 
proof  of  the  identity  of  galvanism  and  electricity.    He  showed 
that  on  communicating  one  of  the  ends  of  his  pile  with  the  earth, 
and  the  other  with  the  interior  of  a  non-insulated  Leyden  bat- 
tery, the  battery  was  charged  in  an  instant  of  time  to  a  degree 
proportional  to  the  force  of  the  pile.    At  the  same  time  an  in- 
stantaneous current  was  observed  in  the  conductor  between  the 
pile  and  the  battery,  which,  according  to  Ritter,  had  all  the  pro- 
perties of  an  ordinary  current.    Now  it  is  evident  that  the  sub- 
terraneous wire  with  its  insulating  covering  may  be  assimilated 
exactly  to  an  immense  Leyden  battery :  the  glass  of  the  jars 
represents  the  gutta  percha ;  the  internal  coating  is  the  surface 
of  the  copper  wire ;  the  external  surface  is  the  moistened  earth. 
To  form  an  idea  of  the  capacity  of  this  new  kind  of  batter)^,  we 
have  only  to  remember  that  the  surface  of  the  wire  is  equal  to  7 
square  metres  per  kilometre.    Making  such  a  wire  communicate 
by  one  of  its  ends  with  a  pile,  of  which  the  other  extremity  is  in 
contact  with  the  earth,  whilst  the  other  extremity  of  the  wire  is 
insulated,  must  cause  the  wire  to  take  a  charge,  of  the  same  cha- 
racter and  tension  as  that  of  the  pole  of  the  pile  touched  by  it: 
—that  is  what  came  to  pass  in  the  first  of  the  instantaneous 
currents  described.    In  Volta's  experiment,  on  breakmg  the 
communication  between  the  pole  and  the  battery  and  connectmg 
the  two  coatings  of  the  latter  by  a  conductor,  an  ordinary  dis- 
charge was  obtained :— to  this  discharge  correspond  the  two  in- 
stantaneous currents  which  are  observed  in  opposite  dn-ections 
at  the  two  extremities  of  the  charged  wire,  on  commumcatmg 


April  1854.]     Subterraneous  telegraph  wires.  523 

their  extremities  with  the  earth,  to  the  exclusion  of  the  pile.  It 
will  be  understood,  also,  that  the  first  instantaneous  current, 
namely  that  which  is  connected  with  the  charge  of  the  wire, 
ought  to  be  equally  produced,  though  of  a  lower  intensity,  even 
when  the  other  extremity  of  the  wire  is  in  communication  with 
the  earth.  The  instantaneous  current  then  precedes  the  con- 
tinuous current,  or,  if  the  statement  be  preferred,  is  added  to  it 
at  the  first  moment.  This  instantaneous  current  has  an  inten- 
sity much  greater  than  that  of  the  continuous  current ;  doubt- 
less because  in  the  act  of  charging  the  wire,  the  electricity  in 
going  to  the  different  points  of  the  wire  passes  through  paths  so 
much  the  shorter  as  the  points  to  be  charged  are  nearer  to  the 
pile."  The  above  is  from  the  Annates  de  Chimie,  1850,  vol. 
xxix.  p.  398,  &c. 

T  am.  Gentlemen, 

Your  very  faithful  Servant, 

M.  Faraday. 

Royal  Institution, 
April  28,  1854. 


% 

I 


524 


On  Magnetic  Hypotheses^. 

This  discourse,  the  purpose  of  which  was  to  direct  the  attention 
of  the  audience  to  the  different  hypothetical  attempts  made  to 
account  physically  for  the  known  properties  of  matter  in  relation 
to  its  magneto-electrical  phaenomena,  followed  on  very  naturally 
to  that  of  Dr.  Frankland  on  the  2nd  instant,  who  then  gave  an 
account  of  the  different  views  advanced  by  Davy,  Ampere,  and 
Berzehus,  of  the  manner  in  which  electricity  might  be  asso- 
ciated with  the  atoms  or  molecules  of  matter,  so  as  to  account 
for  their  electro-chemical  actions,  and  of  the  logical  and  experi- 
mental objections  which  stood  in  the  way  of  each.  Reference 
was  first  made  to  Coulomb's  investigations  of  mutual  magnetic 
actions ;  to  the  hypothesis  advanced  by  him,  that  two  magnetic 
fluids,  associated  with  the  matter  of  magnetic  bodies,  would 
account  for  all  the  pheenomena;  and  to  Poisson's  profound 
mathematical  investigation  of  the  sufficiency  of  the  hypothesis. 
Then  CErsted's  discovery  of  the  relation  of  common  magnetism 
to  currents  of  electricity  was  recalled  to  mind:  — hence  an 
enormous  enlargement  of  the  scope  of  magnetic  force  and  of 
our  knowledge  of  its  actions;  and  hence  Ampere's  beautiful 
investigations,  and  his  hypothesis  (also  sustained  by  the  highest 
mathematical  investigation),— that  all  magnetic  phaenomena  are 
due  to  currents  of  electricity;  and  that  in  such  bodies  as  mag- 
nets, iron,  nickel,  &c.,  the  atoms  or  particles  have  naturally 
currents  of  electricity  running  round  them  in  one  dhection, 
about  what  may  be  considered  as  their  equatorial  parts.  After 
GErsted's  time,  further  experimental    discoveries  occurred; 
currents  of  electricity  were  found  competent  to  induce  collateral 
currents,  and  magnets  proved  able  to  produce  hke  currents; 
thus  showing  the  identity  of  action  of  magnets  and  currents  in 
producing  effects  of  a  kind  different  to  ordinary  magnetic  attrac- 
tions and  repulsions.    Then  diamagnetism  was  discovered,  in 
which  actions  analogous  to  those  of  ordinary  magnetism  oc- 
curred, but  with  the  antithesis  of  attraction  for  repulsion  and 
repulsion  for  attraction ;  and  these  were  so  extensive,  that  what- 
ever bodies  were  not  magnetic  proved  to  be  diamagnetic;  and 
thus  all  matter  was  brought  under  the  dominion  of  that  magnetic 
1  Royal  Institution  Proceedings,  June  9th,  1854. 


June  1854.]  On  magnetic  hypotheses.  525 

force,  whose  physical  mode  of  action  hypothesis  endeavours  to 
account  for.  As  the  hypothesis  of  Ampere  could  not  account 
for  diamagnetic  action,  some  assumed  that  magnetic  and  electric 
force  might,  in  diamagnetic  matter,  induce  currents  of  electricity 
in  the  reverse  direction  to  those  in  magnetic  matter;  or  else 
might  induce  currents  where  before  there  were  none ;  whereas 
in  magnetic  cases  it  was  supposed  they  only  constrained  par- 
ticle-currents to  assume  a  particular  direction,  which  before 
were  in  all  directions.  Weber  stands  eminent  as  a  profound 
mathematician  who  has  confirmed  Ampere's  investigations  as 
far  as  they  proceeded,  and  who  has  made  an  addition  to  his  hy- 
pothetical views ;  namely,  that  there  is  electricity  amongst  the 
particles  of  matter,  which  is  not  thrown  into  the  form  of  a  cur- 
rent until  the  magnetic  induction  comes  upon  it,  but  which  then 
assumes  the  character  of  current,  having  a  direction  the  con- 
trary to  that  of  the  currents  which  Ampere  supposed  to  be 
always  circulating  round  magnetic  matter ;  and  so  these  other 
matters  are  rendered  diamagnetic. 

De  la  Rive,  who  has  recently  most  carefully  examined  the 
various  hypotheses,  and  who  as  an  experimentalist  and  dis- 
coverer has  the  highest  right  to  enter  into  the  consideration  of 
these  deep,  searching,  and  difficult  inquiries,  after  recaUing  the 
various  phaenomena  which  show  that  the  powers  concerned  be- 
long to  the  particles  of  matter  and  not  to  the  masses  merely 
(the  former  conferring  them  by  association  upon  the  latter), 
then  distinguishes  magnetic  action  into  four  kinds  or  modes — 
namely  the  ordinary,  the  diamagnetic,  the  induction  of  ciuTents, 
and  the  rotation  of  a  ray;  and  points  out  that  any  acceptable 
hypotheses  ought  to  account  for  the  four  modes  of  action,  and, 
it  may  be  added,  ought  to  agree  with,  if  not  account  for,  the 
phgenomena  of  electro-chemical  action  also.  De  la  Rive  con- 
ceives that  as  regards  these  modes  of  action  this  hypothetical 
result  may  be  obtained,  and  both  Ampere's  and  Weber's  views 
also  retained  in  the  following  manner.  All  the  atoms  of  matter 
are  supposed  to  be  endowed  with  electrical  currents  of  a  like 
kind,  which  move  about  them  for  ever,  without  diminution  of 
their  force  or  velocity,  being  essentially  a  part  of  their  nature. 
The  direction  of  these  currents  for  each  atom  is  through  one 
determinate  diameter,  which  may  therefore  be  considered  as  the 
axis.    Where  they  emerge  from  the  body  of  the  atom  they 


526 


On  magnetic  hypotheses.  [June  1854. 


divide  in  all  directions,  and  running  over  every  part  of  the  sur- 
face converge  towards  the  opposite  end  of  the  axis  diameter,  and 
there  re-enter  the  atom  to  run  ever  through  the  same  course. 
The  converging  and  diverging  points  are  as  it  were  poles  of 
force.    Where  the  atoms  of  matter  are  close  or  numerous  in  a 
given  space  (and  chemical  considerations  lead  to  the  admission 
of  such  cases),  the  hypothesis  then  admits  that  several  atoms 
may  conjoin  into  a  ring,  so  that  their  central  or  axial  currents 
may  run  one  into  the  other,  and  not  return  as  before  over  the 
surface  of  each  atom :  these  form  the  molecules  of  magnetic 
matter,  and  represent  Ampere's  hypothesis  of  molecular  cur- 
rents.   Where  the  atoms,  being  fewer  in  a  given  space,  are 
further  apart,  or  where,  being  good  conductors,  the  current  runs 
as  freely  over  the  surface  as  through  the  axis,  then  they  do  not 
form  like  groups  to  the  molecules  of  magnetic  matter,  but  are 
still  considered  subject  to  a  species  of  induction  by  the  action  of 
external  magnets  and  currents ;  and  so  give  rise  to  Weber's  re- 
verse currents.    The  induction  of  momentary  currents  and  the 
rotation  of  a  ray  are  considered  by  De  la  Rive  as  in  conformity 
with  such  a  supposition  of  the  electric  state  of  the  atoms  and 

particles  of  matter. 

It  would  seem  that  the  great  variety  of  these  hypotheses 
and  their  rapid  succession  was  rather  a  proof  of  weakness  m 
this  department  of  physical  knowledge  than  of  strength,  and 
that  the  large  assumptions  which  were  made  in  turn  for  each 
should  ever  be  present  to  the  mind.    Even  in  the  most  perfect 
of  them,  i.  e.  De  la  Rive's,  these  assumptions  are  very  con- 
siderable ;  for  it  is  necessary  to  conceive  of  the  molecules  as 
beino-  flat  or  disc-like  bodies,  however  numerous  the  atoms  of 
each^  may  be ;  also  that  the  atoms  of  one  molecule  do  not 
interfere  with  or  break  up  the  disposition  of  those  of  another 
molecule;  also  that  electro-chemical  action  may  consist  with 
such  a  constituted  molecule;  also  that  the  motive  force  of  each 
atom  current  is  resident  in  the  axis,  and  on  the  other  hand 
that  the  passage  of  the  current  over  the  surface  offers  resistance ; 
for  unless  there  were  a  difference  between  the  axial  and  the  sur- 
face force  in  one  direction  or  the  other,  the  atoms  would  have 
no  tendency  to  congregate  in   molecules.     These  remarks, 
however,  are  not  to  be  understood  in  depreciation  of  hypothesis, 
or  as  objections  to  its  right  use.    No  discoverer  could  advance 


June  1854.] 


On  magnetic  hypotheses. 


527 


without  it;  and  such  exertions  as  those  made  by  De  la  Rive,  to 
bring  into  harmony  thoughts  which  in  their  earlier  forms  were 
adverse  to  each  other,  are  of  the  more  value,  because  they  are 
the  exertions  of  a  man  who  knows  the  value  both  of  hypothesis 
and  of  laws,  of  theory  and  of  fact,  and  has  given  proofs  of  the 
power  of  each  by  the  productions  of  his  own  mind.  Still,  that 
mental  reservation  is  to  be  advocated  which  keeps  hypothesis 
in  its  right  place  and  is  ready  to  abandon  it  when  it  fails ;  and 
as  examples  Newton  may  be  referred  to,  who  (as  is  shown  by 
his  Letters  to  Bentley)  had  very  strong  convictions  of  the  physical 
nature  of  the  lines  of  gravitating  force,  yet  in  what  he  publicly 
advanced  stopped  short  at  the  law  of  action  of  the  force,  and 
thence  deduced  his  great  results; — and  also  Arago,  who,  dis- 
covering the  phaenomena  of  magnetic  rotation,  yet  not  perceiving 
their  physical  cause,  had  that  philosophic  power  of  mind  which 
enabled  him  to  refrain  from  suggesting  one. 


528 


On  some  Points  of  Magnetic  Philosophy^. 

3300.  Within  the  last  three  years  I  have  been  bold  enough, 
though  only  as  an  experimentalist,  to  put  forth  new  views  of 
magnetic  action  in  papers  having  for  titles,  "  On  Lines  of  Mag- 
netic Forced"  and  "  On  Physical  Lines  of  Magnetic  Force^." 
The  first  paper  was  simply  an  attempt  to  give,  for  the  use  of 
experimentahsts  and  others,  a  correct  expression  of  the  dual  na- 
ture, amount,  and  direction  of  the  magnetic  power  both  within 
and  outside  of  magnets,  apart  from  any  assumption  regarding  the 
character  of  the  source  of  the  power ;  that  the  mind,  in  reasoning 
forward  towards  new  developments  and  discoveries,  might  be  free 
from  the  bondage  and  deleterious  influence  of  assumptions  of 
such  a  nature  (3075.  3243.).  The  second  paper  was  a  speculation 
respecting  the  possible  physical  nature  of  the  force,  as  existing 
outside  of  the  magnet  as  well  as  within  it,  and  within  what  are 
called  magnetic  bodies,  and  was  expressly  described  as  being 
entirely  hypothetical  in  its  character  (3243.). 

3301.  There  are  at  present  two,  or  rather  three  general  hypo- 
theses of  the  physical  nature  of  magnetic  action.  First,  that  of 
jethers,  carrying  with  it  the  idea  of  fluxes  or  currents,  and  this 
Euler  has  set  forth  in  a  simple  manner  to  the  unmathematical 
philosopher  in  his  Letters^— in  that  hypothesis  the  magnetic 
fluid  or  sether  is  supposed  to  move  in  streams  through  magnets, 
and  also  the  space  and  substances  around  them.  Then  there  is 
the  hypothesis  of  two  magnetic  fluids,  which  being  present  m 
all  magnetic  bodies,  and  accumulated  at  the  poles  of  a  magnet, 
exert  attractions  and  repulsions  upon  portions  of  both  fluids  at 
a  distance,  and  so  cause  the  attractions  and  repulsions  of  the 
distant  bodies  containing  them.  Lastly,  there  is  the  hypothesis 
of  Ampere,  which  assumes  the  existence  of  electrical  currents 
round  the  particles  of  magnets,  which  currents,  acting  at  a  di- 
stance upon  other  particles  having  like  currents,  arranges  them 
in  the  masses  to  which  they  belong,  and  so  renders  such  masses 

1  From  the  Philosophical  Magazine  for  February  1855. 

2  Phil.  Trans.  1862,  p.  26. 

'Phil.  Mag.  1862,  June,  p.  401.  o^no^o 
^  Euler's  Letters,  translated,  1802,  vol.  i.  p.  214;  vol.  n.  pp.  240,  242. 


244. 


Dec.  1854.]  Magnetic  hypotheses.  529 

subject  to  the  magnetic  action.  Each  of  these  ideas  is  varied 
more  or  less  by  different  philosophers^,  but  the  three  distinct 
expressions  of  them  which  I  have  just  given  will  suffice  for  my 
present  purpose.  My  physico-hypothetical  notion  does  not  go 
so  far  in  assumption  as  the  second  and  third  of  these  ideas,  for 
it  does  not  profess  to  say  how  the  magnetic  force  is  originated 
or  sustained  in  a  magnet ;  it  falls  in  rather  with  the  first  view, 
yet  does  not  assume  so  much.  Accepting  the  magnet  as  a 
centre  of  power  surrounded  by  lines  of  force,  which,  as  repre- 
sentants  of  the  power,  are  now  justified  by  mathematical  ana- 
lysis (3302.),  it  views  these  hues  as  physical  lines  of  power, 
essential  both  to  the  existence  of  the  force  within  the  magnet, 
and  to  its  conveyance  to,  and  exertion  upon,  magnetic  bodies  at 
a  distance.  Those  who  entertain  in  any  degree  the  aether  notion 
might  consider  these  hues  as  currents,  or  progressive  vibrations, 
or  as  stationary  undulations,  or  as  a  state  of  tension.  For  many 
reasons  they  should  be  contemplated  round  a  wire  carrying  an 
electric  current,  as  well  as  when  issuing  from  a  magnetic  pole. 

3302.  The  attention  of  two  very  able  men  and  eminent  mathe- 
maticians has  fallen  upon  my  proposition  to  represent  the  mag- 
netic power  by  lines  of  magnetic  force ;  and  it  is  to  me  a  source 
of  great  gratification  and  much  encouragement  to  find  that  they 
affirm  the  truthfulness  and  generality  of  the  method  of  repre- 
sentation. Professor  W.  Thomson,  in  referring  to  a  like  view 
of  lines  of  force  applied  to  static  electricity  (1295.  1304.),  and 
to  Fourier^s  law  of  motion  for  heat,  says  that  the  lines  of  force 
give  the  same  mathematical  results  as  Coulomb's  theory,  and  by 
more  simple  processes  of  analysis  (if  possible)  than  the  latter'; 
and  afterwards  refers  to  the  "strict  foundation  for  an  analogy  on 
which  the  conducting  power  of  a  magnetic  medium  for  lines  of  force 
may  be  spoken  of  Van  Rees  has  published  a  mathematical 
paper  on  my  lines  of  force  in  Dutch ^,  which  has  been  transferred 
into  Poggendorff's  Annalen'^,  and  of  which  I  have  only  a  very 
imperfect  knowledge  by  translated  abstracts.  He  objects,  as  I 
understand,  to  what  I  may  call  the  physical  part  of  my  view  as 
assigning  no  origin  for  the  lines,  and  as  not  presenting  the  higher 

'  Phil.  Mag.  1854,  vol.  viii.  p.  53. 
«  Ibid.  p.  56. 

'  Trans.  Royal  Acad.  Sciences  of  Amsterdam,  1864,  p.  17. 
*  Poggendorfifs  Amialen,  1863,  vol.  xc.  p.  416. 
VOL..  III.  2  M 


530  Points  of  magnetic  philosophy.     [Dec.  1854. 

principle  conveyed  by  the  idea  of  magnetic  fluids  or  of  electric 
currents :  he  says  it  does  not  displace  the  old  theories,  or  render 
them  superfluous ;  but  I  think  I  am  right  in  beheving,  that,  as 
far  as  the  lines  are  taken  to  be  representations  of  the  power,  he 
accepts  them  as  correct  representations,  even  to  the  full  extent 
of  the  hypotheses,  either  of  magnetic  fluids  or  electric  currents. 
It  was  always  my  intention  to  avoid  substituting  anything  in 
place  of  these  fluids  or  currents,  that  the  mind  might  be  delivered 
from  the  bondage  of  preconceived  notions ;  but  for  those  who 
desire  an  idea  to  rest  upon,  there  is  the  old  principle  of  the 
aethers. 

3303.  The  encouragement  I  derive  from  this  appreciation  by 
mathematicians  of  the  mode  of  figuring  to  one's  self  the  magnetic 
forces  by  lines,  emboldens  me  to  dwell  a  little  more  upon  the 
further  point  of  the  true  but  unknown  natural  magnetic  action. 
Indeed,  what  we  really  want,  is  not  a  variety  of  difi'erent  methods 
of  representing  the  forces,  but  the  one  true  physical  signification 
of  that  which  is  rendered  apparent  to  us  by  the  phsenomena,  and 
the  laws  governing  them.    Of  the  two  assumptions  most  usually 
entertained  at  present,  magnetic  fluids  and  electric  currents,  one 
must  be  wrong,  perhaps  both  are;  and  I  do  not  perceive  that  the 
mathematician,  even  though  he  may  think  that  each  contains 
a  higher  principle  than  any  I  have  advanced,  can  tell  the  true 
from  the  false,  or  say  that  either  is  true.    Neither  of  these  views 
could  have  led  the  mind  to  the  phenomena  of  diamagnetism, 
and  I  think  not  to  the  magnetic  rotation  of  light ;  and  I  sup- 
pose that  if  the  question  of  the  possibility  of  diamagnetic  phse- 
nomena  could  have  been  asked  beforehand,  a  mathematician, 
guided  by  either  hypothesis,  must  have  denied  that  possibility. 
The  notion  that  I  have  introduced  comphcates  the  matter  still 
further,  for  it  is  inconsistent  with  either  of  the  former  views,  so 
long  as  they  depend  exclusively  upon  action  at  a  distance  without 
intermediation ;  and  yet  in  the  form  of  lines  of  force  it  represents 
magnetic  actions  truly  in  all  that  is  not  hypothetical.    So  that 
there  are  now  three  fundamental  notions,  and  two  of  them  at 
least  must  be  impossible,  i.  e.  untrue. 

3304.  It  is  evident,  therefore,  that  our  physical  views  are  very 
doubtful;  and  I  think  good  would  result  from  an  endeavour  to 
shake  ourselves  loose  from  such  preconceptions  as  are  contained 
in  them,  that  we  may  contemplate  for  a  time  the  force  as  much  as 


Dec.  1854.]  Magnetic  hypotheses. 


531 


possible  in  its  purity.  At  present  we  cannot  think  of  polarity 
without  feeling  ourselves  drawn  into  one  or  the  other  of  the  two 
hypotheses  of  the  origin  of  polar  powers  ;  and  as  mathematical 
considerations  cannot  give  a  decision^  we  feel  as  if  the  subject 
were  in  that  same  doubtful  condition  which  hung  over  the  con- 
flicting theories  of  light  prior  to  the  researches  of  modern  time ; 
but  as  there  the  use  of  Wheatstone's  reflector,  combined  with 
Ai'ago's  suggestion  of  a  decisive  experiment,  and  its  realization 
by  Leon  Foucardt,  appear  to  have  settled  that  question,  so  we 
may  hope  by  a  due  exertion  of  judgement,  united  with  experi- 
ment, to  obtain  a  resolution  of  the  magnetic  difficulty  also. 

3305.  If  we  could  tell  the  disposition  of  the  force  of  a  magnet, 
fli'st  at  the  place  of  its  origin,  and  next  in  the  space  around,  we 
should  then  have  attained  to  a  very  important  position  in  the 
pursuit  of  our  subject ;  and  if  we  could  do  that,  assuming  little 
or  nothing,  then  we  should  be  in  the  very  best  condition  for 
carrying  the  pursuitfurther.  Supposing  that  we  imagine  the  mag- 
net a  sort  of  sun  (as  there  is  every  reason  to  believe  that  the  sun 
is  a  magnet)  polarized,  with  antithetical  powers,  ever  filling  all 
space  around  it  with  its  curved  beams,  as  either  the  sun  or  a 
candle  fills  space  with  luminous  rays ;  and  supposing  that  such 
a  view  takes  equal  position  with  either  of  the  two  former  views 
in  representing  truly  the  disposition  of  the  forces,  and  that 
mathematical  considerations  cannot  at  present  decide  which  of 
the  three  views  is  either  above  or  inferior  to  its  co-rivals ;  it  surely 
becomes  necessary  that  physical  reasoning  should  be  brought  to 
bear  upon  the  subject  as  largely  as  possible.  For  if  there  be  such 
physical  lines  of  magnetic  force  as  coiTcspond  (in  having  a  real 
existence)  to  the  rays  of  light,  it  does  not  seem  so  very  impos- 
sible for  experiment  to  touch  them ;  and  it  must  be  very  im- 
portant to  obtain  an  answer  to  the  inquiry  respecting  their  ex- 
istence, especially  as  the  answer  is  likely  enough  to  be  in  the 
affirmative.  I  therefore  purpose,  without  asserting  anything 
regarding  the  physical  hypothesis  of  the  magnet  more  strongly 
than  before  (3299.),  to  call  the  attention  of  experimenters,  in 
a  somewhat  desultory  manner,  to  the  subject  again,  both  as 
respects  the  deficiency  of  the  present  physical  views  and  the  pos- 
sible existence  of  lines  of  physical  force,  concentrating  the  obser- 
vations I  may  have  to  make  about  a  few  points — as  polarity , 
duality,  &c.,  as  occasion  may  best  serve ;  and  I  am  encouraged  to 

2m  2 


532  Points  of  magnetic  philosophy.     [Dec.  1854. 

make  this  endeavour  by  the  following  considerations.  1.  The 
confirmation  by  mathematicians  of  the  truthfulness  of  the  abs- 
tract lines  of  force  in  representing  the  direction  and  amount  of 
the  magnetic  power ; — 2.  My  own  personal  advantageous  use 
of  the  lines  on  numerous  occasions  (3174.) ; — 3.  The  close  ana- 
logy of  the  magnetic  force  and  the  other  dual  powers,  either  in 
the  static  or  dynamic  state,  and  especially  of  the  magnet  with 
the  voltaic  battery  or  any  other  sustaining  source  of  an  electric 
current; — 4.  Euler's  idea  of  magnetic  sethers  or  circulating  fluids; 

 5.  The  strong  conviction  expressed  by  Sir  Isaac  Newton,  that 

even  gravity  cannot- be  carried  on  to  produce  a  distant  eff'ect 
except  by  some  interposed  agent  ^  fulfilling  the  conditions  of  a 
physical  line  of  force ;— 6.  The  example  of  the  conflict  and  final 
experimental  settlement  of  the  two  theories  of  hght. 

3306.  I  believe  that  the  use  by  me  of  the  phrase  "  places  of 
force "  has  been  considered  by  some  as  objectionable,  inasmuch 
as  it  would  seem  to  anticipate  the  decision  that  there  are  physical 
lines  of  force.    I  will  endeavour  so  to  use  it,  if  necessary,  as  not 
to  imply  the  assertion.    Nevertheless  I  may  observe,  that  we 
use  such  a  phrase  in  relation  to  a  ray  of  light,  even  in  those 
parts  of  the  ray  where  it  is  not  extinguished,  and  where  there- 
fore we  have  no  better  knowledge  of  it  or  its  existence  than  in 
similar  magnetic  cases ;  and  we  also  use  the  phrase  when  speak- 
ing of  gravity  in  respect  of  places  where  no  second  body  to  gra- 
vitate upon  is  present,  and  where,  when  existing,  it  cannot, 
according  to  our  present  views,  cause  the  gravitating  force  of  the 
primary  body,  or  even  the  determination  of  it,  upon  that  parti- 
cular place. 

Magnetic  polarity. 

3307.  The  meaning  of  this  phrase  is  rapidly  becoming  more 
and  more  uncertain.    In  the  ordinary  view,  polarity  does  not 

1  Newton  says,  "  That  gravity  should  be  innate,  inherent,  and  essential 
to  matter,  so  that  one  body  may  act  upon  another  at  a  distance  through  a 
vacuum,  without  the  mediation  of  anything  else,  by  and  through  which 
their  action  and  force  may  be  conveyed  from  one  to  another,  is  to  me  so 
great  an  absurdity,  that  I  believe  no  man  who  has  in  philosophical  matters 
a  competent  faculty  of  thinking  can  ever  fall  into  it.  Gravity  must  be 
caused  by  an  agent  acting  constantly  according  to  certain  laws ;  but  whether 
this  agent  be  material  or  immaterial  I  have  left  to  the  consideration  of  my 
readers."    See  the  third  letter  to  Bentley. 


Dec.  1854.]    Polarity — Us  various  meanings.  533 

necessarily  touch  much  upon  the  idea  of  lines  of  physical  force ; 
yet  in  the  one  natural  truth  it  must  either  be  essential  to,  and 
identified  with  it,  or  else  absolutely  incompatible  with,  and 
opposed  to  it.    Coulomb's  view  makes  polarity  to  depend  upon 
the  resultant  in  direction  of  the  action  of  two  separated  and  di- 
stant portions  of  two  magnetic  fluids  upon  other  like  separated 
portions,  which  are  either  originally  separate,  as  in  a  magnet,  or 
are  induced  to  separate,  as  in  soft  iron,  by  the  action  of  the 
dominant  magnet; — it  is  essential  to  this  hypothesis  that  the 
polarity  force  of  one  name  should  repel  polarity  force  of  the  same 
name  and  attract  that  of  the  other  name.    Ampere's  view  of 
polarity  is,  that  there  are  no  magnetic  fluids,  but  that  closed 
currents  of  electricity  can  exist  round  particles  of  matter  (or 
round  masses),  and  that  the  known  experimental  difference  on 
the  opposite  sides  of  these  currents,  shown  by  attraction  and 
repulsion  of  other  currents,  constitutes  polarity.  Ampere's 
view  is  modified  (chiefly  by  addition)  in  various  ways  by  Weber, 
De  la  Rive,  Matteucci,  and  others.    My  view  of  polarity  is 
founded  upon  the  character  in  direction  of  the  force  itself,  what- 
ever the  cause  of  that  force  may  be,  and  asserts  that  when  an 
electro-conducting  body  moving  in  a  constant  direction  near  or 
between  bodies  acting  magnetically  on  themselves  or  each  other, 
has  a  current  in  a  constant  direction  produced  in  it,  the  mag- 
netic polarity  is  the  same;  if  the  motion  or  the  current  be 
reversed,  the  contrary  polarity  is  indicated.    The  indication  is 
true  either  for  the  exterior  or  the  interior  of  magnetic  bodies 
whenever  the  electric  current  is  produced,  and  depends  upon  the 
unknown  but  essential  dual  or  antithetical  nature  of  the  force 
which  we  call  magnetism  (3154.). 

3308,  The  numerous  meanings  of  the  term  polarity,  and 
various  interpretations  of  polarity  indications  at  present  current, 
show  the  increasing  uncertainty  of  the  idea  and  the  word  itself. 
Some  consider  that  the  mere  set  or  attraction,  or  even  repulsion, 
shown  by  a  body  when  subject  to  a  dominant  magnet  is  sufficient 
to  mark  polarity,  and  I  think  it  is  as  good  a  test  as  any  more 
refined  arrangement  (2693.)  when  the  old  notion  of  polarity  only 
is  under  consideration.  Others  require  that  two  bodies  under 
the  power  of  a  dominant  magnet  should  by  their  actions  show  a 
mutual  relation  to  each  other  before  they  can  be  considered  as 
polar.    Tyndall,  without  meaning  to  include  any  idea  of  the 


534 


Points  of  magnetic  philosophy.     [Dec.  1854. 


nature  of  the  magnetic  force,  takes  his  type  from  soft  iron,  and 
considers  that  any  body  presenting  the  like  or  the  antithetical 
pheenomena  which  such  iron  would  present  under  magnetic  action, 
is  in  a  like  or  antithetical  state  of  polarity  ^    Thomson  does  not 
view  two  bodies  which  present  these  antithetical  positions  or 
phsenomena  as  being  necessarily  the  reverse  of  each  other  in 
what  may  be  called  their  polar  states^,  but,  I  think,  looks  more 
to  differential  action,  and  in  that  approaches  towards  the  views 
held  generally  by  E.  Becquerel  and  myself.    Matteucci  considers 
that  the  whole  mass  of  the  polar  body  ought  to  be  in  dependence 
by  its  particles  as  a  mass  of  iron  is,  and  that  a  solution  of  iron 
and  certain  salts  of  iron  have  not  poles,  properly  speaking,  but 
that  at  the  nearest  points  to  the  dominant  pole  there  is  the  con- 
trary magnetism  to  that  of  the  pole,  surrounded  by  the  same 
magnetism  as  of  the  pole  in  the  further  part,  the  two  ends  of  a 
bar  of  such  matter  between  two  dominant  poles  having  no  rela- 
tion to  each  other^.    Becquerel  considers  that  polarity  may  in 
certain  cases  occur  transverse  to  the  length,  and  so  produce 
results  which  others  explain  by  reverse  polarity.    The  views  of 
very  many  parties  always  include  the  idea  of  the  source  of  the 
polar  action,  whether  that  be  supposed  to  depend  on  the  accu- 
mulation of  magnetic  fluids  at  the  chief  poles  of  the  dominant 
magnet,  or  the  action  of  electric  currents  in  a  determinate  posi- 
tion around  its  molecules ;  and  such  views  are  adhered  to  even 
when  the  polarity  induced  is  of  the  reverse  kind,  as  in  bismuth, 
&c.,  to  that  of  the  inducing  magnet.    Others,  like  Weber,  add  to 
Ampere's  hypothesis  an  idea  of  electricity,  loose  as  regards  the 
particles,  though  inseparably  associated  with  the  mass  of  the 
body  under  induction.    Some,  I  think,  make  the  polarity  not 
altogether  dependent  upon  the  dominant  magnet,  but  upon  the 
neighbouring  or  surrounding  substances ;  and  I  propose,  if  the 
physical  lines  of  force  should  hereafter  be  justified,  to  make  that 
which  is  commonly  called  polarity,  in  distinction  from  the  true 
polarity  (3307.),  dependent  upon  the  curvature  of  lines  of  force 
due  to  the  better  or  worse  magneto-conduction  power  of  the 
substances  presenting  the  usual  polar  phaenomena  (2818.). 
3309.  The  views  of  polar  action  and  of  magnetism  itself,  as 

1  Athenfeum,  No.  1406,  p.  1203. 
^  Ibid,  column  3  at  bottom. 
Cours  special  sur  Vinduction,  <§rc.,  p.  201 . 


Dec.  1854.]    Polarity  of  bismuth— examined.  535 

formerly  entertained,  have  been  powerfully  agitated  by  the  dis- 
covery of  diamagnetism.  I  was  soon  driven  from  my  first  sup- 
position, that  the  N  pole  of  a  magnet  induced  like  or  N  polarity 
in  the  near  part  of  a  piece  of  bismuth  or  phosphorus;  but  as 
that  view  has  been  sustained  by  very  eminent  men,  who  tie  up 
with  it  the  existence  of  magnetic  fluids  or  closed  electric  currents 
as  the  source  of  magnetic  power,  it  claims  continued  exami- 
nation, for  it  will  most  likely  be  a  touchstone  and  developer  of 
real  scientific  truth,  whichever  way  the  arguments  may  prevail. 
To  me  the  idea  appears  to  involve,  if  not  magnetic  impossibi- 
lities, at  least  great  contradiction  and  much  confusion,  some  of 
which  I  proceed  to  state,  but  only  with  the  desire  of  elucidating 
the  general  subject. 

3310.  If  an  ordinary  magnet  M,  fig.  1,  Fig.  1  • 

acting  upon  a  piece  of  iron  or  other  para- 
magnetic matter  I,  renders  it  polar  by       ^  ^ 

throwing  its  near  end  into  the  contrary  or  \s       ■n\    CZD 

S  state  in  the  manner  usually  understood, 
and,  acting  upon  a  like  piece  of  diamag- 

netic  matter  as  bismuth  B,  renders  it  also  polar,  but  with  the  near 
end  in  the  same  state ;  then  B  and  I  are  for  the  time  two  mag- 
nets, and  must  act  back  upon  the  magnet  M ;  or  if  they  could 
be  made  able  to  retain  their  states  after  M  is  removed  (and  that 
is  the  case  with  I),  would  act  as  magnets  upon  a  third  piece  of 
magnetic  matter  as  C.  When  M  acts  upon  I,  it  exerts  its  influ- 
ence, according  to  the  received  theories,  upon  all  the  particles  of 
the  latter,  bringing  them  into  like  polar  position  with  itseK,  and 
these,  consistently  with  the  simple  assumption,  act  also  upon 
each  other  as  particle  magnets,  and  exalt  the  polarity  of  the  whole 
mass  in  its  two  extremities.  In  like  manner  M  should  act  upon 
B,  polarizing  the  mass  and  all  its  particles ;  for  the  particles  of 
the  diamagnetic  body  B,  even  to  the  smallest,  must  be  operated 
upon;  and  we  know  experimentally,  that  a  tube  filled  with 
powdered  bismuth  acts  as  a  bar  of  the  metal  does.  But  then, 
what  is  the  mutual  action  of  these  bismuth  particles  on  each  other? 
for  though  all  may  be  supposed  to  have  a  reverse  polarity  to  that 
of  M,  they  cannot  in  that  case  be  reverse  in  respect  of  each  other. 
All  must  have  like  polarity,  and  the  N  of  one  particle  must  be 
opposed  to  the  S  of  the  next  particle  in  the  polarity  direction. 
That  these  particles  act  on  each  other,  must  be  true,  and  Tyn- 


536  Points  of  magnetic  philosophy.     [Dec.  1854. 

dalFs  results  on  the  effect  of  compression  have  proved  that  by 
the  right  means,  namely  experiment.    If  they  were  supposed  to 
have  no  such  action  on  each  other,  it  would  be  in  contradiction 
to  the  essential  nature  of  magnetic  action,  and  there  would 
remain  no  reason  to  think  that  the  magnet  itself  could  act  on 
the  particles,  or  the  particles  react  on  it.    If  they  acted  on  each 
other  as  the  magnet  is  supposed  to  act  on  them,  i.  e.  to  induce 
contrary  poles,  then  the  power  of  the  magnet  would  be  nullified, 
and  the  more  effectually  the  nearer  the  particles  were  together ; 
whereas  Tyndall  has  shown  that  the  bismuth  magnetic  condition 
is  exalted  by  such  vicinity  of  the  particles,  and  hence  we  have  a 
further  right  to  conclude  that  they  do  act  on,  or  influence  each 
other,  to  the  exaltation  of  the  state  of  the  mass.    But  if  the 
N-ness  of  one  particle  corresponds  to,  and  aids  in  sustaining  and 
exalting,  the  S-ness  of  the  next  particle,  the  whole  mass  must 
have  the  same  kind  of  force  ;  so  that,  as  a  magnet,  its  polarity 
must  have  the  same  kind  of  polarity  as  that  of  the  particles 
themselves.    For  whether  a  particle  of  bismuth  be  considered  as 
acting  upon  a  neighbouring  particle  or  upon  a  distant  particle 
of  bismuth,  or  whether  a  mass  of  particles  be  considered  as  act- 
ing on  the  distant  particle,  the  action  in  both  cases  must  be  pre- 
cisely of  the  same  kind. 

3311.  But  why  should  a  polarized  particle  of  bismuth  acting 
upon  another  particle  of  bismuth  produce  in  it  like  polarity,  and 
with  a  particle  of  iron  produce  a  contrary  polarity?  or  why 
should  masses  of  bismuth  and  iron,  when  they  act  as  magnets 
(3310.),  produce  such  different  effects  ?  If  such  were  the  case, 
then  the  N  pole  of  a  paramagnetic  body  would  induce  an  S  pole 
on  the  near  end  of  an  iron  rod,  whilst  the  N  pole  of  a  diamag- 
netic  body  would  produce  a  pole  contrary  to  the  former,  i.  e.  an 
N  pole  at  the  same  end  of  the  iron  rod  in  the  same  position  and 
place.  This  would  be  to  assume  two  kinds  of  magnetism,  i.  e. 
two  north  fluids  (or  electric  currents)  and  two  south ;  and  the 
northness  of  bismuth  would  differ  from  the  northness  of  iron  as 
much  as  pole  from  pole.  Still  more,  the  northness  of  bismuth 
and  the  southness  of  iron  would  be  found  to  have  exactly  like 
qualities  in  all  points,  and  to  differ  in  nothing  but  name ;  and 
the  southness  of  bismuth  aud  northness  of  iron  would  also 
prove  to  be  absolutely  alike.  What  is  this,  in  fact,  but  to  say 
they  are  the  same  ?  and  why  should  we  not  accept  the  confirma- 


Dec.  1854.]    Two  sorts  of  magnetism — media.  537 

tion  and  unfailing  proof  that  it  is  so,  which  is  given  to  us  expe- 
rimentally by  the  moving  wire  ?  (3307.  3356.) 

3312.  If  we  employ  a  magnet  as  the  originally  inducing  body 
(3310.),  and  entertain  the  idea  of  magnetic  fluids  accumulated 
at  the  poles,  which  act  by  their  power  of  attracting  each  other, 
but  repelling  their  like,  then  the  inconsistency  of  supposing  that 
the  north  fluid  of  a  given  pole  can  attract  the  north  fluid  of  one 
body  and  the  south  fluid  of  another,  or  that  the  north  and  south 
fluids  of  the  dominant  magnet  can  attract  one  and  the  same  fluid 
in  bismuth  and  in  iron,  &c.,  is  very  manifest.  Or  if  we  act  by  a 
solenoid  or  a  helix  of  copper  wire  carrying  an  electric  current 
instead  of  a  magnet,  and  find  that  analogous  efi"ects  are  produced, 
are  we  to  admit  at  once  that  the  electric  currents  in  it,  acting 
upon  the  assumed  electric  circuits  round  the  particles  of  matter, 
sometimes  attract  them  on  the  one  side  and  sometimes  on  the 
other  ?  or  if  such  bodies  as  bismuth  and  platinum  are  put  into 
such  a  helix,  are  we  to  allow  that  currents  in  opposite  directions 
are  induced  in  them  by  one  and  the  same  inducing  condition  ? 
and  that,  too,  when  all  the  other  phsenomena,  and  there  are 
many,  point  to  a  uniformity  of  action  as  to  direction  with  a  varia- 
tion only  in  power. 

Media. 

3313.  Let  us  now  consider  for  a  time  the  action  of  diff'erent 
media,  and  the  evidence  they  give  in  respect  of  polarity.  If  a 
weak  solution  of  protosulphate  of  iron  ^,  m,  be  put  into  a  selected 
thin  glass  tube  about  an  inch  long,  and  one-third  or  one-fourth 
of  an  inch  in  diameter,  and  sealed  up  hermetically  (2279.), 
and  be  then  suspended  horizontally  between  the  magnetic  poles 
in  the  aii*,  it  will  point  axially,  and  behave  in  other  respects  as 
iron ;  if,  instead  of  air  between  the  poles,  a  solution  of  the  same 
kind  as  m,  but  a  little  stronger,  n,  be  substituted,  the  solution  in 
the  tube  will  point  equatorially,  or  as  bismuth.  A  like  solution 
somewhat  weaker  than  m,  to  be  called  /,  enclosed  in  a  similar 
tube,  will  behave  like  bismuth  in  air  but  like  iron  in  water. 
Now  these  are  precisely  the  actions  which  have  been  attributed 
to  polarity,  and  by  which  the  assumed  reverse  polarities  of  para- 
magnetic and  diamagnetic  bodies  have  been  considered  as  esta- 

'  Let  I  contain  4  grains,  m  8  grains,  n  16  grains,  and  o  32  grains,  of 
crystallized  protosulphate  of  iron  in  each  cubic  inch  of  water. 


538  Points  of  magnetic  philosophy.     [Dec.  1854. 

blished;  but  when  examined,  how  will  ideas  of  polarity  apply  to 
these  cases,  or  they  to  it  ?  The  solution  I  points  and  acts  like 
bismuth  in  air  and  like  iron  in  water ;  are  we  then  to  conclude 
that  it  has  reverse  polarity  in  these  cases  ?  and  if  so,  what  are 
the  reasons  and  causes  for  such  a  singular  contrast  in  that  which 
must  be  considered  as  dependent  upon  its  internal  or  molecular 
state  ? 

3314.  In  the  first  place,  no  want  of  magnetic  continuity  of 
parts  can  have  anything  to  do  with  the  inversion  of  the  phseno- 
mena ;  for  it  has  been  shown  sufficiently  by  former  experiments^, 
that  such  solutions  are  as  magnetically  continuous  in  character 
as  iron  itseK. 

3315.  In  the  next  place,  I  think  it  is  impossible  to  say  that 
the  medium  interposed  between  the  magnet  and  the  suspended 
cylinder  of  fluid  can  cut  off,  or  in  any  way  affect  the  direct  force 
of  the  former  on  the  latter,  so  as  to  change  the  direction  of  its 
internal  polarity.    Let  the  tube  be  filled  with  the  solution  m, 
then  if  it  be  surrounded  by  the  solution  I,  it  will  point  as  iron ; 
if  the  stronger  solution  n  surround  it,  it  will  point  as  bismuth ; 
and  with  sufficient  care  a  succession  of  these  fluids  may  be  ar- 
ranged as  indicated  in  figs.  2,  3,  where  the  outlines  between 
the  poles  represent  the  forms  of  thin  glass  troughs,  and  the  let- 
ters the  solutions  in  them.    In  fig.  2  we  see 
that  the  action  on  m  is  the  same  as  that  on 
wl,  and  the  pointing  of  the  two  portions  is  the 
same,  i.  e.  equatorial ;  neither  has  the  action 
on  m  been  altered  by  the  power  of  the  poles 
having  to  traverse  n,  m!  and  n' ;  and  in  fig.  3 
we  see,  that,  under  like  circumstances  of  the 
power,  m!  points  as  bismuth  and  m  as  iron, 
though  they  are  the  same  solution  with  each 
other  and  with  the  former  m  m'  solutions.  No 
cutting  off  of  power  by  the  media  could  cause 
these  changes repetitions  of  position  in  the 
first  case,  and  inversions  in  the  second.  All 
that  could  be  expected  from  any  such  intercep- 
tions would  be  perhaps  diminutions  of  action, 
but  not  inversions  of  polarity;  and  every  con- 
sideration indicates  that  all  the  portions  of 

"  Phil.  Mag.  1846,  vol.  xxix.  p.  254. 


Fig.  2. 


Dkc.  1854.]    Polanty — pointing  bij  differential  action.  539 

these  solutions  in  the  field  at  once  have  like  polarittj,  i.  e.  like 
direction  of  force  through  them,  and  like  internal  condition; 
each  solution  in  its  complex  arrangement  being  aflfected  exactly 
in  the  same  way  and  degree  as  if  it  filled  the  whole  of  the  mag- 
netic field,  although  in  these  particular  arrangements  it  sometimes 
points  like  iron,  and  at  other  times  like  bismuth  (2363.2414.). 

3316,  These  motions  and  pointings  of  the  same  or  of  difierent 
solutions,  contain  every  action  and  indication  which  is  supposed 
to  distinguish  the  contrary  polarities  of  paramagnetic  and  dia- 
magnetic  bodies  from  each  other,  and  the  solutions  I  and  m  in 
air  repeat  exactly  the  phenomena  presented  in  air  by  phosphorus 
and  platinum,  which  are  respectively  diamagnetic  and  paramag- 
netic substances.  But  we  know  that  these  actions  are  due  to 
the  differential  result  of  the  masses  of  the  moving  or  setting 
solution  and  of  that  (or  the  air)  surrounding  it.  No  stinictujal 
or  internal  polarity,  having  opposite  directions,  is  necessary  to 
account  for  them  (2361.  2757.).  If,  therefore,  it  is  still  said 
that  the  solution  m  has  one  polarity  in  /  and  the  reverse  polarity 
in  n,  that  would  be  to  make  the  polarity  depend  upon  the  mass 
of  m  independently  of  its  particles ;  for  it  can  hardly  be  supposed 
that  the  particles  of  m  are  more  aflected  by  the  influence  upon 
them  of  the  surrounding  medium  (itself  under  like  inductive 
action  only,  and  almost  insensible  as  a  magnet),  than  they  are 
by  the  dominant  magnet  ^  It  would  be  also  to  make  the  polarity 
of  m  as  much,  or  more,  dependent  upon  the  surrounding  medium 
than  upon  the  magnet  itself; — and  it  would  be,  to  make  the  masses 
of  m  and  /  and  even  their  form  the  determining  cause  of  the 
polarity ;  which  would  remove  polarity  altogether  from  depend- 
ence upon  internal  molecular  condition,  and,  I  think,  destroy 
the  last  remains  of  the  usual  idea.  For  my  own  part,  I  cannot 
conceive  that  when  a  little  sphere  of  m  in  the  solution  /  is 
attracted  upon  the  approach  of  a  given  magnetic  poJe,  and  re- 
pelled under  the  action  of  the  same  pole  when  it  is  in  the  solu- 
tion n,  its  particles  are  in  the  two  cases  polar  in  two  opposite 

'  If  the  polarity  of  the  inner  mass  of  solution  is  dependent  upon  that  of 
the  outer,  and  cannot  be  affected  but  through  it,  then  why  is  not  air  and 
space  admitted  as  being  in  effective  magnetic  relation  to  the  bodies  sur- 
rounded by  them  ?  How  else  could  a  distant  body  be  acted  upon  by  a 
magnet,  if  the  inner  solution  of  sulphate  of  iron  is  so  acted  on  ?  Are  we 
to  assume  one  mode  of  action  by  contiguous  masses  or  particles  in  one  case, 
and  another  through  distance  in  another  case  ? 


540  Points  of  magnetic  philosophy.     [Dec.  1854. 

directions ;  or  that  if  for  a  north  magnetic  pole  it  is  the  near 
side  of  the  particles  of  m  when  in  /  that  assume  the  south  state, 
it  is  the  further  side  which  acquires  the  same  state  when  the 
solution  I  is  changed  for  n.  Nor  can  I  think  that  when  the 
particles  of  m  have  the  same  polar  state  in  both  solutions,  the 
whole,  as  a  mass,  can  have  the  opposite  states. 

3317.  These  differential  results  run  on  in  one  uninterrupted 
course  from  the  extreme  of  paramagnetic  bodies  to  the  extreme 
of  diamagnetic  bodies;  and  there  is  no  substance  within  the 
series  which,  in  association  with  those  on  each  side  of  it,  may 
not  be  made  to  present  in  itself  the  appearances  and  action  which 
are  considered  as  indicating  the  opposite  polarities  of  iron  and 
bismuth.    How  then  is  their  case,  in  the  one  or  the  other  con- 
dition, to  be  distinguished  from  the  assumed  polarity  conditions 
of  bismuth  or  of  iron  ?-only,  1  think,  by  assuming  other  points 
which  beg  the  whole  question.    In  the  first  place,  it  must  be,  or 
is  assumed,  that  no  magnetic  force  exists  in  the  space  around  a 
magnet  when  it  is  in  a  vacuum,  it  being  denied  that  the  power 
either  crosses  or  reaches  a  locality  in  that  space  until  some  ma- 
terial substance,  as  the  bismuth  or  iron,  is  there.    It  is  assumed 
that  the  space  is  in  a  state  of  magnetic  darkness  (3305.),  an 
assumption  so  large,  considering  the  knowledge  we  have  of  natural 
powers,  and  especially  of  dual  forces,  that  there  is  none  larger  m 
any  part  of  magnetic  or  electric  science,  and  is  the  very  pomt 
which  of  all  others  should  be  held  in  doubt  and  pursued  by  ex- 
perimental  investigation.    It  is  as  if  one  should  say,  there  is  no 
lio-ht  or  form  of  light  in  the  space  between  the  sun  and  the  earth 
because  that  space  is  invisible  to  the  eye.    Newton  himseK  durst 
not  make  a  like  assumption  even  in  the  case  of  gravitation  (3305.), 
but  most  carefully  guards  himself  and  warns  others  against  it, 
and  Euler  ^  seems  to  follow  him  in  this  matter.   Such  an  assump- 
tion, however,  enables  the  parties  who  make  it  to  dismiss  the 
consideration  of  differential  effects  when  bodies  are  placed  m  a 
vacuum,  and  to  divide  the  bodies  into  the  well-known  double 
series  of  paramagnetic  and  diamagnetic  substances.    But  m  the 
second  place,  even  then,  those  who  assume  the  reverse  polarity  of 
diamagnetic  bodies,  must  assume  also  that  the  state  set  up  in 
them  by  induction  is  less  favourable  to  either  the  exercise  or 
the  transmission  of  the  magnetic  force  than  the  original  unpo- 
•  Letters,  &c.  translated.    Letter  LXVIIL,  or  pp.  260-262. 


Dec.  1854.]  Time  results.  541 

larized  state  of  the  bismuth ;  an  assumption  which  is,  I  think, 
contrary  to  the  natural  action  and  final  stable  condition  into 
which  the  physical  forces  tend  to  bring  all  bodies  subject  to 
them.  That  a  magnet  acting  on  a  piece  of  iron  should  so  deter- 
mine and  dispose  of  the  forces  as  to  make  the  magnet  and  iron 
mutually  accordant  in  their  action,  I  can  conceive ;  but  that  it 
should  throw  the  bismuth  into  a  state  which  would  make  it  repel 
the  magnet,  whereas  if  imaffected  it  should  be  so  far  favourable 
as  to  be  at  least  indifferent,  is  what  I  cannot  imagine  to  myseK. 
In  the  third  place,  those  who  rest  their  ideas  on  magnetic  fluids, 
must  assume  that  in  all  diamagnetic  cases,  and  in  them  only,  the 
fundamental  idea  of  their  mutual  action  must  not  only  be  set 
aside  but  inverted,  so  that  the  hypothesis  would  be  at  war  with 
itself;  and  those  who  assume  that  electric  currents  are  the  cause 
of  magnetic  effects,  would  have  to  give  up  the  law  of  their  in- 
ducing action  (as  far  as  we  know  it)  in  all  cases  of  diamagnetism, 
at  the  very  same  moment  when,  if  they  approached  the  diamag- 
netic bismuth  in  the  form  of  a  spiral  to  the  pole,  they  would 
have  a  current  produced  in  it  according  to  that  law.  \ 

Time. 

3318.  I  will  venture  another  thought  or  two  regarding  the 
condition  into  which  diamagnetic  bodies  are  brought  by  the  act 
of  magnetic  induction,  in  connexion  with  the  point  of  tiine.  It 
appears,  as  far  as  I  remember,  that  all  natural  forces  tend  to 
produce  a  state  of  rest,  except  in  cases  where  vital  or  organic 
powers  are  concerned ;  and  that  as  in  life  the  actions  are  for  ever 
progressive,  and  have  respect  to  a  future  rather  than  a  present 
state  (Paget),  so  all  inorganic  exertions  of  force  tend  to  bring 
about  a  stable  and  permanent  condition,  having  as  the  result  a 
state  of  rest,  i.  e.  a  static  condition  of  the  powers. 

3319.  Applying  this  consideration  to  the  case  of  bismuth  in 
the  magnetic  field,  it  seems  to  me  more  like  the  truth  of  nature 
that  the  state  assumed  by  the  bismuth  should  be  one  more 
favourable  to  the  final  and  static  exercise  of  the  power  of  the 
dominant  magnet  upon  it,  than  that  state  belonging  to  the  bis- 
muth before  it  had  suffered  or  undergone  the  induction  ;  exactly 
as  in  soft  iron  we  know  that  before  it  has  acquired  the  state 
which  a  dominant  magnet  can  induce  upon  it,  it  is  not  so  favour- 
able to  the  final  static  condition  of  the  powers  as  it  is  afterwards. 


542  Points  of  magnetic  philosophy.     [Dec.  1854. 

Now  it  is  very  manifest,  by  numerous  forms  of  experiment,  that 
time  enters  as  an  element  into  ordinary  magnetic  and  magneto- 
electric  actions,  and  there  is  every  reason  to  expect,  into  diamag- 
netic  actions  also ;  and  it  is  also  well  known  that  we  can  take 
advantage  of  this  time,  and  test  the  state  of  a  piece  of  iron  in 
the  magnetic  field  before  it  has  attained  its  finally  induced  state, 
and  afterwards;— as,  for  instance,  by  placing  it  with  a  hehx  round 
it  in  the  magnetic  field  and  quickly  connecting  the  helix  afterwards 
with  a  galvanometer,  when  a  current  of  electricity  in  such  direc- 
tion as  to  prove  the  truth  of  the  statement  will  be  obtained.  In 
other  forms  of  experiment,  and  with  large  pieces  of  iron,  the 
time  which  can  be  so  separated  or  snatched  up  during  the  act  of 
progressive  induction  will  amount  to  a  minute  or  more.  Sup- 
posing this  could  be  done  in  any  sensible  degree  with  diamag- 
netic  bodies,  then  the  following  considerations  present  them- 
selves.   A  globe  or  bar  of  bismuth  in  the  magnetic  field  may 
have  its  states,  before  and  after  induction,  considered  as  sepa- 
rated by  a  moment  of  time;  if  the  induction  raises  up  a  state  of 
polarity  the  reverse  of  that  of  the  magnet,  then  the  bismuth 
ought  to  be  more  favourable  to  the  determination  of  magnetic 
force  upon  it  before  the  induction  than  after ;  whereas  if,  accord- 
ing to  my  view,  the  polarity  is  not  reversed,  but  is  the  same  as 
that  of  the  magnet,  the  metal  ought  to  be  more  favourable  to 
the  determination  of  magnetic  force  upon  or  through  it  after 
induction  than  before.    Believing  this  to  be  an  experiment  which 
would  settle  the  question  of  reverse  polarity,  and  perhaps  the 
existence  or  non-existence  of  physical  lines  of  magnetic  force,  I 
have  made  many  attempts  in  various  ways,  and  especially  by 
alternating  motions  of  cylinders  and  balls  of  bismuth  between 
soft  iron  magnetic  poles  furnished  with  hehces,  to  obtain  some 
results  due  to  the  time  of  induction,  but  have  been  as  yet  unable 
to  succeed.     I  cannot  doubt  that  time  is  concerned;  but  it 
seems  to  be  so  brief  in  period  as  to  be  inappreciable  by  the  means 

I  have  employed. 

3320  Professor  Thomson  has  put  this  matter  ot  time  ana 
polarity  in  another  form.  If  a  globe  of  bismuth  be  placed  with- 
out friction  in  the  middle  of  the  magnetic  field,  it  will  not  pomt 
or  move  because  of  its  shape;  but  if  it  have  reverse  polarity,  it 
will  be  in  a  state  of  unstable  equilibrium ;  and  if  time  be  an  ele- 
ment then  the  ball,  being  once  moved  on  its  axis  ever  so  little. 


Dkc.  1854.]  Perpetual  motion— dependent  dualities.  543 

would  then  have  its  polarity  inclined  to  the  magnetic  axis,  and 
would  go  on  revolving  for  ever,  producing  a  perpetual  motion. 
1  do  not  see  how  this  consequence  can  be  avoided,  and  therefore 
cannot  admit  the  principles  on  which  it  rests.  The  idea  of  a 
perpetual  motion  produced  by  static  forces  is  philosophically  illo- 
gical and  impossible,  and  so  I  think  is  the  polarly  opposed  or 
adverse  static  condition  to  which  I  have  already  referred. 

3331.  It  is  not  necessary  here  that  I  should  refer  to  the 
manner  in  which  my  view  of  the  lines  of  magnetic  force  meet 
these  cases,  for  it  has  been  done  in  former  papers  (2797.  &c.) ; 
but  I  will  call  the  attention  of  those  who  like  to  pursue  the  sub- 
ject, to  a  true  case  of  reverse  polarity  in  the  magnetic  field  (Ex- 
perimental Researches,  3238,  fig.  15),  and  there  they  will  easily 
see  and  comprehend  the  beginning  of  the  rotation  of  Professor 
Thomson^s  bismuth  globe,  and  its  continuance,  if,  as  supposed, 
the  polar  state  represented  in  the  figure  could  be  continually 
renewed. 

3322.  When  the  north  pole  of  a  magnet  repels  a  piece  of 
bismuth  in  a  vacuum,  or  makes  a  bar  of  it  set  equatorially,  and 
is  fou.nd  to  produce  like  actions  with  many  paramagnetic  bodies 
when  surroimded  by  media  a  little  more  paramagnetic  than 
themselves,  and  with  as  many  diamagnetic  bodies  when  sur- 

.  rounded  by  media  a  little  less  diamagnetic,  it  would  seem  more 
cautious  in  the  first  instance  to  inquire  how  these  latter  motions 
take  place,  and  how  it  is  that  parts,  which  with  the  paramag- 
netics  have  certainly  been  brought  into  a  south  condition  by  the 
noi'th  end  of  the  pole,  recede  from  it ;  and  to  apply  these  results 
in  Aie  first  instance  to  those  obtained  with  bismuth  in  a  vacuum, 
before  we  assume  a  total  change  in  principle,  and  yet  an  excep- 
tional change  as  to  substances,  in  the  general  law  of  magnetic 
polarity,  without  any  cause  assigned  than,  or  any  supporting 
facts  beyond,  the  efibct  in  question. 

Curved  lines  of  magnetic  force — dependence  of  the  dualities. 

3323.  The  representative  idea  of  lines  of  magnetic  force  which 
I  entertain,  includes  in  it  the  thought  of  the  curvature  of  these 
lines,  not  as  a  merely  convenient  notion  making  the  idea  of  the 
lines  more  manageable,  but  as  one  flowing  from  and  suggested, 
if  not  proved,  by  the  phsenomena  themselves.  It  is  in  this  point 
of  view  that  I  proceed  to  consider  it ;  and  as  the  proof  of  the 


544  Points  of  magnetic  philosophy.     [Dec.  1854. 

curvature  is,  in  respect  of  principle,  in  the  essential  and  neces- 
sary dependence  of  the  two  qualities  or  parts  of  a  dual  force 
upon  each  other  (3324.  &c.) ;  and  in  respect  of  experiment,  by 
the  numerous  results  supplied  during  the  mutual  actions  of 
magnets  and  magnetic  bodies  and  the  phsenomena  of  movmg 
conductors  (3337.  &c.),  I  will  consider  each  in  turn. 

3324.  There  is  no  known  case  of  one  form  or  part  of  a  dual 
power  existing  otherwise  than  with,  and  in  dependence  on,  the 
other,  which  then  exists  simultaneously  to  an  equivalent,  i.  e.  an 
equal,  degree.   In  static  electricity,  where  supposed  electric  fluids 
are  considered  as  being  separated  from  each  other,  they  are  m 
equal  amount  (1177.),  are  ever  related  to  each  other  (1681.), 
often  by  curved  lines  of  force   (1215.),   and  the  existence 
of  the  one  electricity  without  the  other,  or  in  the  smallest 
degree  of  excess  or  deficiency,  is  absolutely  impossible  (1174.). 
In  the  voltaic  battery,  or  in  the  electric  current  produced 
in  any  other  way,  as  by  thermo  arrangements  or  inductions, 
the  current  in  one  part  of  the  circuit  is  absolutely  the  same 
in  amount  and  in  dual  character  as  in  another ;  and  m  the  msu- 
lated,  unconnected  voltaic  battery,  where  the  sustaimng  power 
is  internal,  not  the  slightest  development  of  the  forces,  or  ot 
either  of  them,  can  occur  until  circuit  is  completed,  or  induction 
allowed  at  the  extremities ;  for  if,  when  there  is  no  circuit,  the 
induction  be  prevented,  not  merely  no  current,  but  no  stock  ot 
electricity  at  the  battery  poles  ready  to  produce  a  current  can  be 
evolved  in  the  slightest  degree.    In  like  manner  I  am  fully  per- 
suaded  that  the  northness  and  southness  of  magnetism  (m  what- 
ever they  may  be  supposed  to  consist)  cannot  exist  alone  j-nor 
without  exact  proportion  to  each  other  j- nor  without  mutual  de- 
pendence upon  each  other but  that  they  are  subject  to  the 
mutual  relation  and  dependence  of  all  dual  force. 

3325.  Let  us  consider  a  hard  invariable  magnet  m  space, 
fig.  4.    If  a  piece  of  soft  iron,  I,  be 
brought  towards  it,  the  N  end  of  the  ^ig.  4. 

magnet  will  cause  southness  in  the 
near  end  of  the  iron  and  northness  in  ^^^^^^^ 
the  further  end,  and  this  will  continue  «  n 

until  the  iron  is  removed,  the  south- 
ness and  northness  at  the  two  ends  or  halves  of  the  magnet 
having  remained  all  the  time  unchanged  in  their  equality  and 


Dec.  1854.]    Mutual  dependence  of  the  dualities.  545 


amount  (3223.  3221.).  Now  to  say  that  the  force  emanating 
from  N  could  act  on  the  iron,  producing  like  and  the  contrary 
force,  and  then,  by  removal  of  the  iron,  cease  to  act  there  or 
elsewhere;  and  then  again  act  on  the  iron  if  approached,  or  any- 
thing else,  and  then  cease  to  act,  and  so  on ;  would  in  my  mind 
be  to  deny  the  conservation  offeree : — and  we  know  that  there  is 
no  equivalent  action  within  the  magnet,  to  explain  by  any  alter- 
nate excitement  and  suppression  of  the  dual  parts,  any  sup- 
posed appearance  and  disappearance  of  the  powers  at  the  differ- 
ent times ;  for  a  helix  closely  applied  round  the  middle  part  of 
the  magnet  during  the  experiment  gives  no  current,  and  by  that 
shows  that  there  is  no  equivalent  internal  derangement  of  the 
power,  when  the  outer  exercise  of  it  may  be  supposed  to  change 
between  active  and  inert. 

3326.  Suppose  the  power  of  such  a  magnet  to  be  due  to 
magnetic  N  and  S  fluids ;  can  it  be  thought  that  the  N  parti- 
cles can  be  sometimes  exerting  their  attraction  for  S  particles, 
and  sometimes  not  ?  Would  not  that  be  equivalent  to  the 
assumption  of  a  suppression,  i.  e.  a  destruction  of  force  ? — which 
surely  cannot  be.  Such  an  assumption  could  be  surpassed  only 
by  that  which  supposes  that  the  N  fluid  might  sometimes  at- 
tract S  and  repel  N,  and  at  other  times  repel  S  and  attract  N 
fluids  (3311.  3312.  3317.). 

3327.  As  to  the  soft  iron  under  induction  (3325,),  its  dual 
magnetic  forces  do  re-enter  into  their  former  mutually  depend- 
ent and  mutually  satisfying  state :  but  suppose  it  to  be  replaced 
by  steel,  and  that  the  magnetisms  produced  in  it  do  not  recom- 
bine  or  disappear  on  the  removal  of  the  dominant  magnet,  then 
on  what  is  their  power  ultimately  turned,  if  not  on  each  other  ? 
(3257.  3324.)  Where  is  the  S  power  of  the  steel  disposed  of. 
when  it  is  separated  from  its  relation  with  the  N  power  of  the 
magnet  that  evolved  it  ?  The  case  cannot  be  met  except  by 
affirming  the  independent  existence  of  the  two  powers  (3329.) ; 
or,  admitting  the  suppression  of  force,  and  of  either  of  these  forces 
the  one  without  the  other  (3330.) ;  or  allowing  the  mutual  de- 
pendence of  the  two  polarities  of  the  magnet  (3331.). 

3328.  When  the  N  pole  of  a  magnet  (fig.  5)  is  acting  in 
free  space,  its  force  is  sensible  around  to  a  certain  amount 
(114.);  when  a  piece  of  soft  iron,  I,  is  brought  near  it,  much  of 
its  force  gathers  up  upon  that  iron,  but  the  whole  amount  of 

VOL.  III.  2  N 


546  Some  points  of  magneiic  philosophy.    [Dec.  1854. 

force  from  and  about  the  N  pole  is  the  Fig.  5. 

same ;  when  an  S  pole  is  brought  up, 
either  of  another  magnet  or  of  itself 
(for  the  effect  is  precisely  the  same), 
much  of  the  force  exerted  upon  the 


'4' 


iron  is  removed  from  it,  and  falls     ^//XfA  ^ZZ^ZZZ 


upon  the  S  pole,  but  the  amount  of 
force  about  the  pole  N  remains  the  same;  all  of  which  can 
be  proved  experimentally  by  a  hehx  on  the  soft  iron  and  loops 
carried  over  the  N  pole  (3218.  3223.).  Indeed  the  way  in  which 
the  power  of  one  pole  over  either  iron  or  bismuth  is  affected 
and  diminished  by  the  approximation  on  the  same  side  of  a 
contrary  pole,  is  perfectly  well  known,  and  there  are  hundreds 
of  cases  in  which  the  disposition  in  direction  of  the  magnetic 
power  can  be  varied  in  a  great  variety  of  ways,  without  the 
slightest  change  in  the  sum  of  its  amount  at  the  source,  each  of 
which  gives  evidence  of  the  antithetical  and  inseparable  con- 
dition of  the  two  forms  of  force. 

3329.  As  to  independent  existence  of  the  two  powers 
(3327.),  how  is  it  then  that  they  cannot  be  shown  separately  ? 

 not  even  up  to  the  degree  which  is  exhibited,  so  to  say,  by 

static  electricity.  There  is  nothing  like  a  charge  of  northness 
or  a  charge  of  southness  in  any  one  of  the  innumerable  phseno- 
mena  presented  by  magnetism  (3341.).  The  two  are  just  as 
closely  connected  as  the  two  electricities  of  a  voltaic  battery ;  . 
whether  we  consider  it  as  giving  the  current  when  properly  con- 
nected, or  exhibiting  induction  at  its  extremities  when  uncon- 
nected. The  difficulty,  indeed,  is  to  find  a  fact  which  gives  one 
the  least  hold  for  consideration  of  the  thought  that  the  two  mag- 
netic forces  can  be  separated,  or  considered  apart  from  each  other. 

3330.  As  to  the  suppression  of  force  (3327.),  I  conceive  that 
the  creation,  annihilation,  or  suppression  of  force,  and  still  more 
emphatically  of  one  form  only  of  a  dual  force,  is  as  impossible 
as  the  like  of  matter.  All  that  is  permitted  under  the  general 
laws  of  nature  is  to  displace,  remove,  and  otherwise  employ  it ; 
and  these  conditions  are  as  true  of  the  smallest  suppression  of  a 
force,  or  part  of  a  force,  as  of  the  suppression  of  the  whole.  I 
may  fui-ther  ask,  whether,  as  it  is  physically  impossible  to  anni- 
hilate or  suppress  force,  it  is  not  also  mathematically  impossible 
to  do  so,  consistently  with  the  law  of  the  conservation  of  force  ? 


Dec.  1854.]    Mutual  dependence  of  the  dualities.  54*^ 

3331.  If  we  say  that  the  forces  in  the  cases  of  removal 
(3327.)  are  disposed  of,  sometimes  in  one  direction  and  some- 
times in  another,  but  with  the  preservation  of  their  full  and 
equivalent  amount,  then  how  are  we  to  consider  them  disposed 
of  in  the  case  of  a  cylinder  or  globular  magnet,  placed  in  air 
or  vacuo,  so  as  to  be  entirely  self-dependent  ? — or  in  the  case 
of  a  magnetic  sphere  placed  in  an  inverted  position  in  the  mag- 
netic field,  so  as  to  be  entirely  surrounded  and  enclosed  by 
magnetic  forces  having  a  contrary  direction  to  its  own  (3321. 
3238.)  ? 

3332.  If  we  say  that  the  dualities  of  such  a  magnet  are  de- 
pendent on  each  other  (which  is  the  third  case  (3327.)),  then 
we  have  to  consider  how  this  can  be,  consistently  with  the 
distant  mutual  action,  either  of  magnetic  fluids  or  electric 
currents,  acting  in  right  lines  only.  Such  action  must  then 
be  thi'ough  the  body  of  the  magnet  (3260.).  If  we  confine  our 
attention  to  magnetic  fluids,  then  the  direction  of  their  forces 
towards  each  other  through  the  magnet  when  it  is  alone,  must  be 
of  the  like  nature  as  their  direction  to  approached  iron,  in  which 
they  are  supposed  to  induce  collections  of  the  contrary  fluids,  or 
towards  the  fluids  at  the  contrary  poles  of  approached  equal  or 
superior  magnets;  i.  e.  the  two  poles  of  the  magnet  must  be 
conceived  of  as  centres  of  force,  sometimes  exerting  their  power 
towards  each  other  in  a  given  direction  through  the  body  of  the 
magnet,  and  at  other  times  exerting  them  outwardly  to  external 
poles  in  a  direction  exactly  the  contrary.  But  the  currents 
which  are  evolved  by  the  rotation  of  the  magnet,  or  of  discs  of 
metal  combined  with  it  (3119.  3163.),  show  that  the  direction 
of  the  force  (which  is  its  polarity)  is  not  thus  reverse  in  the 
two  halves  of  the  case,  but  is  the  same  within  the  magnet  as  in 
the  prolongation  of  direction  through  and  beyond  the  pole ; 
and  also,  that  whether  the  magnet  be  alone,  and  therefore  sup- 
posed to  have  the  polar  forces  exerted  on  each  other  through  it, 
or  be  in  relation  to  outer  magnets^  so  as  to  have  this  exertion 
of  force  entirely  removed  from  its  interior,  still  it  is  always  the 
same ;  having  in  both  cases  the  same  condition,  direction,  and 
amount  of  power  within  it  (3116.). 

3333.  If  the  charged  and  polar  state  of  the  magnet  be  sup- 
posed to  depend  upon  molecular  electric  currents,  held  by  some 
internal  condition  in  a  position  of  parallelism,  it  is  impossible 

2  N  2 


548  f^ome  points  of  magnetic  philosophy .    [Dec.  1854. 

that  these  can  act  backwards  upon  each  other  through  the  mag- 
net in  straight  lines,  so  as  to  put  the  northness  and  southness 
of  the  pole  in  mutual  dependence,  as  they  are  supposed  to  be  in 
relation  to  external  poles,  without  the  currents  themselves  being 
displaced  and  turned,  until  the  whole  magnet  is  neutralized  ; 
falling  back  into  the  undeveloped  state,  just  as  a  piece  of  soft 
iron  falls  back.    When  this  return  of  state  happens  in  soft  iron 
or  steel  in  any  degree,  a  helix  round  these  shows  the  induced 
currents  consequent  on  such  a  change ;  and  a  loop  (3133.  3217.) 
shows  the  difference  when  the  iron  or  magnet  is  polar  outwards 
and  when  its  state  has  fallen.    No  such  effects  happen  with  a 
hard  magnet,  when  it  is  alternately  left  to  itself  or  put  in  rela- 
tion to  external  poles  of  other  magnets.    The  body  of  the  mag- 
net, and  the  forces  passing  through  it,  remain  unchanged, 
whether  examined  by  the  loop  (3223.)  or  by  its  own  motion, 
or  that  of  discs  and  wires  associated  with  it  (3116.  &c.).  Its 
force  ever  remains  the  same  in  quantity  and  general  direction. 

3334.  The  case  of  the  steel  ring  magnet  (3283.)  is  well 
known,  and  the  manner  in  which  such  a  magnet,  showing  no 
external  relation,  developes  strong  poles  when  it  is  broken.  The 
phenomena  assure  us,  I  think,  that  when  broken  the  northness 
and  southness  then  appearing,  cannot,  when  the  pieces  are  by 
themselves,  be  determined  upon  each  other  backward  through 
the  magnet ;  there  is  no  sufficient  reason  to  suppose  such  a 
thing.    And,  again,  the  mutual  destruction  of  highly-charged 
hnear  magnets,  such  as  steel  needles,  when  many  of  them  are 
made  into  a  thick,  short  bundle,  shows  the  same  thing ;  for  if 
when  alone  the  polar  powers  are  not  external,  but  are  deter- 
mined upon  each  other  through  each  individual  magnet,  they 
are  as  free  for  a  like  disposal  when  the  elementary  magnets  are 
associated  as  when  they  are  separated  :— and  then  there  remams 
no  sufficient  reason  to  expect  a  dominant  action  over  each  other 
superior  to  that  which  each  has  over  itself. 

3335.  It  is  not  to  be  supposed  that  the  change  of  force  which 
occurs  when  the  magnet  first  acting  externally  is  then  made  to 
act  internally  or  through  itself,  would  be  small  and  unnoticeable. 
It  should  be  as  great  as  the  whole  amount  of  power  which  the 
magnet  can  show  under  the  most  favourable  circumstance ;  and 
the  means  are  abundantly  sufficient,  by  moving  wires  and  discs, 
to  make  that  evident  in  any  case  which  might  imply  its  passing 


Dec.  1854.]    Mutual  dependence  of  the  dualities.  549 

through,  or  being  removed  out  of,  the  magnet: — so  that  no 
difficulty  can  occur  in  that  respect,  and  there  remains,  therefore, 
in  my  mind,  but  two  suppositions ;  either  the  N  polar  force  of 
a  magnet  when  taken  off  from  external  compensating  S  polar 
force,  is  not  exerted  elsewhere  as  magnetic  force  at  all ;  or  else 
it  is  externally  thrown  upon  and  associated  with  the  S  polar 
force  of  the  same  magnet,  and  so  sustained  and  disposed  of,  for 
the  time,  in  its  natural,  equivalent,  and  essential  state.  If  con- 
verted into  any  new  form  of  power,  what  is  that  form  ?  where 
is  it  disposed  of?  by  what  effects  is  it  recognized?  what  are 
the  proofs  of  its  existence  ?  To  these  inquiries  there  are  no 
answers.  But  if  it  be  directed  externally  upon  the  opposite  S 
pole  of  the  magnet,  then  all  the  consequences  and  foundations 
of  my  hypotheses  of  magnetic  force  and  its  polarity  come  forth ; 
and,  as  I  incHne  to  believe,  a  consistent  and  satisfactory  account 
of  all  magnetic  phsenomena,  short  of  the  idea  of  the  nature  of 
the  magnetic  force  itself,  is  supplied. 

3336.  For  if  the  dual  forces  of  the  poles  of  a  magnet  in  free 
space  are  related  to,  and  dependent  upon,  each  other,  and  yet 
not  through  the  magnet  (3331.),  then  it  must  be  through 
the  space  around.    Then  space  must  have  a  real  magnetic  re- 
lation to  the  force  passing  across  it,  just  as  it  has  to  the  ray  of 
light  passing  from  an  illuminating  to  an  illuminated  body. 
Then  the  directions  in  which  the  two  forces  are  exerted  upon 
each  other  cannot  be  in  right  lines,  which  must,  if  they  existed, 
pass  of  necessity  through  the  magnet ;  but  in  curved  lines, 
seeing  that  it  is  impossible  that  any  but  curved  lines  can  hold 
the  poles  in  relation  to  each  other  through  the  surrounding  space 
(3297.) : — and  if  they  be  curved  lines,  then  I  cannot  imagine 
them  to  be  anything  else  than  physical  lines  of  force ;  lines  fitted 
to  transfer  the  power  onwards  in  consistency  with  its  inevitable 
dual  relation,  and  in  conformity  with  that  direction  which  ought, 
as  I  think,  to  be  properly  called  jooZflrf/?/.    And  it  further  ap- 
pears to  me,  that  if  we  once  admit  the  magnetic  relation  of  a 
vacuum,  then  all  the  phsenomena  of  paramagnetic  and  diamag- 
netic  bodies  ;  of  differential  polarity  and  individual  polarity ;  of 
solutions,  needles,  crystals  and  moving  conductors,  are  presented 
in  a  simple  mutual  relation,  without  any  contradiction  of  fact  or 
hypothesis,  and  in  perfect  harmony  with  each  other. 

3337.  I  wish  to  avoid  prolonging  this  paper  by  a  repetition 


550  Some  points  of  magnetic  jjhilosophy .    [Dec.  1854. 


1 


of  the  considerations  and  reasons  already  advanced  on  former 
occasions,  and  therefore  will  very  briefly  call  to  mind  the  idea 
I  have  put  forth,  that  there  are  such  lines  of  force  in  the  space 
around  a  magnet ;  that  the  mutual  dependence  of  the  dualities, 
which  is  essential  in  the  isolated  magnet,  is  thus  sustained ;  and 
that  bodies  in  this  space  produce  paramagnetic  or  diamagnetic 
phenomena,  according  as  they  favour  or  oppose  the  degree  of 
sustaining  power  which  mere  space  possesses.  That  these  bodies, 
or  media  as  they  may  be  called,  have  a  magnetic  relation  like 
that  of  space,  is  easily  shown  by  numerous  experimental  results ; 
but  as  they  have  a  further  relation  amongst  themselves,  depend- 
ent upon  their  relative  electro- conducting  power, 
I  think  a  little  time  may  be  usefully  employed        T'ig-  6. 
in  considering  how  far  the  consequent  results 
illustrate  the  probable  condition  of  space  where 
they  are  not  present.    Consider  a  magnetic  pole     a   a    a  a 
N,  fig.  6,  placed  in  relation  to  an  equal  mag- 
netic pole  S,  so  that  their  powers  are  mutually 
related  and  sustained,  and  the  space  between 
them,  a,  a,  a,  occupied  by  a  vacuum,  nitrogen,  or  some  other  gas 
at  magnetic  zero  (2770.  &c.) : — the  force  exerted  by  N  on  S,  or 
reciprocally,  is  easily  taken  cognizance  of  by  spirals,  &c.  as 
regards  any  change  in  direction  or  degree.    Then  consider  the 
medium  a,  a,  a  to  be  all  copper  or  all  mercury,  still  the  forces 
are  undisturbed  :  or  consider  it  part  mercury  or  copper,  and 
part  vacuum  or  glass,  divided  either  by  a  line  running  from  S 
to  N,  or  along  a  a  a,  or  any  other  way,  still  the  forces  are  un- 
disturbed ;  any  of  these  media  act  exactly  like  space,  or  so  like 
it,  we  can  scarcely  trace  a  difference.    Then  consider  the  metal 
moving,  either  as  a  finely  divided  stream  at  a,  a,  a,  or  as  a 
solid  globe  (of  copper)  C,  fig.  7,  revolving  rapidly  round  the  line 
from  N  to  S ;  still  it  is  exactly  like  the  vacuum  or 
indifferent  gas  or  glass,  and  there  is  no  effect  as  yet 
by  which  we  might  distinguish  the  material  medium 
from  the  mere  space.    But  let  the  stream  of  me- 
tallic particles  be  converted  into  a  continuous  plate, 
and  then  we  know  it  becomes  filled  with  abundant 
currents  of  electricity  ;  or  if  we  apply  the  wires  of 
a  galvanometer  to  the  revolving  copper  globe  C, 


1 


at  the  axial  and  equatorial  parts,  we  can  then  cause  it  to 


Dec.  1854.]    Static  and  dynamic  condition  of  media.  551 

develope  (by  permission  of  currents)  a  new  effect,  and  the  cur- 
rents are  sent  out  most  abundantly  by  the  conductors  applied. 
If  the  copper  globe  C  be  rapidly  revolved  upon  an  axis  per- 
pendicular to  the  line  S  N,  so  strong  and  influential  a  me- 
dium is  it,  magnetically  considered,  that  the  two  poles,  N  and  S, 
if  free  to  move,  do  move  in  the  same  direction  as  the  near  parts 
of  the  globe  ;  and  are  absolutely  carried  away  from  each  other, 
in  opposition  to  their  mutually  attractive  force,  which  tends 
strongly  all  the  while  to  draw  them  together.    Now,  how  is  it 
possible  to  conceive  that  the  copper  or  mercury  could  have  this 
power  in  the  moving  state,  if  it  had  no  relation  at  all  to  the 
magnetic  force  in  the  fixed  state  ?  or,  that  it  should  have  like 
power  in  the  compact  state,  and  yet  have  no  relation  to  the 
magnetic  force  in  the  divided  and  moving  state  ?   The  mere 
addition  of  motion  could  do  nothing,  unless  there  were  a  prior 
static  dependence  of  the  magnet  and  the  metal  upon  each  other. 
We  know  very  well  that  the  actions  in  the  moving  cases  involve 
the  evolution,  or  a  tendency  to  the  evolution,  of  electric  cur- 
rents ;  but  that  knowledge  is  further  proof  that  the  metals  are 
in  prior  relation  to  the  magnetic  forces ;  and  as  bodies,  even 
down  to  aqueous  solution,  have  these  electric  currents  set  up  in 
them  under  like  circumstances,  we  have  full  reason  to  believe 
that  all  bodies  when  in  the  magnetic  field  are  in  like  static  re- 
lation as  the  copper  when  not  moving  : — and  that  when  motion 
is  superadded,  they  would  all  evolve  electric  currents,  were  it 
not  for  their  bad  electro-conducting  powers. 

3338.  These  effects  of  motion  are  known  to  be  identical  with 
those  of  the  moving  wire  (36.  55.),  or  those  of  voltaic  in- 
duction (6.  &c.)  ;  and  their  intensity  and  power  is  very  well 
shown  in  the  force  of  Elkington's  magneto-electric  apparatus 
and  Ruhmkorff's  induction  coil.  Time  is  concerned  in  their 
production,  and  Professor  Henry  has  shown  us,  in  some  degree, 
that  when  the  currents  are  moving  in  heUces,  the  magnetic  action 
across  them  is  for  a  time  cut  off  or  deflected  (1730.).  These 
actions  are,  in  every  case,  simple ;  i.  e.  a  line  of  force  in  a  given 
polar  direction  produces,  or  tends  to  produce,  in  a  body  moving 
across  it,  whether  paramagnetic,  neutral,  or  diamagnetic  (3146. 
3162.),  a  current  in  the  like  direction ;  which  current  must,  as 
I  conceive,  be  dependent  upon  a  previous  like  static  state.  No- 
thing in  the  slightest  degree  analogous  to  the  sujjposed  oppo- 


552  Some  points  of  magnetic  philosophy .    [Dec.  1854. 

sitely  polar  states  of  paramagnetic  and  diamagnetic  bodies  has 
ever  been  discovered  amongst  them; — and  it  has  never  been  said, 
or  supposed,  as  far  as  I  know,  that  the  two  actions,  i.  e.  the 
magnetic  and  the  magneto-electric,  are  separate  in  their  essential 
nature,  or  that  they  are  not  the  consistent  and  accordant,  and  I 
must  add  reciprocal,  actions  of  one  force. 

3339.  That  the  copper,  &c.  are  effectual  as  magnetic  media 
when  in  the  field,  may  be  stated  also  thus  : — 

Let  N,  fig.  8,  be  a  magnetic  pole,  and  C  a  ^' 
thick  disc  or  short  cylinder  of  copper.  If 
the  copper  revolve  ever  so  rapidly  on  its 
axis,  there  will  be  no  production  of  currents 
in  it ;  and  the  magnetic  action  of  N  on 
other  magnets  will  be  the  same,  as  if  the  metal  were  quiescent 
or  even  away.  If  N  recede  from  C  there  are  then  currents  in  C, 
though  it  be  not  moving;  and  though  the  effect  of  N  upon 
other  magnets,  as  far  as  we  know  them,  is  unchanged;  yet  there 
is  then  a  slight  attraction  between  C  and  the  N  pole.  If  N  be 
made  to  approach  C,  the  reverse  currents  and  actions  occur.  As 
N  approaches  or  recedes  more  quickly  or  slowly,  the  currents 
produced,  and  consequent  temporary  magnetic  state,  are  higher. 
A  cyhnder  electro-magnet  will  show  these  effects  very  well. 
The  copper  has  all  the  time  been  still,  no  motion  has  been  pur- 
posely given  to  it ;  it  has  been  affected  by  the  approximation  and 
recession  of  the  pole,  has  passed  from  one  state  to  another,  which 
states  remain  stationary  as  long  as  the  poles  are  quiescent,  and 
it  shows  every  character  of  a  medium  affected  by  the  magnetic 
force.  By  expedients  the  currents  in  the  copper  maybe  allowed 
or  prevented ;  but  whether  they  be  allowed  or  not,  the  state  the 
copper  medium  arrives  at  is  the  same.  If  disallowed  as  the 
magnet  approaches,  but  allowed  as  it  recedes,  then  the  current 
due  to  the  last  change  occurs,  an  effect  easily  shown  mth  a 
magnet  and  helix;  and  this  seems  to  prove  very  distinctly  that 
the  copper  within  the  constant  influence  of  the  magnet  has  a 
permanent,  static,  magnetic  condition  ;  and  is  therefore  a  mag- 
netic medium,  having  lines  of  force  passing  through  it.  If  C 
be  of  bismuth  instead  of  copper,  the  same  currents  in  the  same 
direction  occur,  though  in  a  far  smaller  degree;  and,  as  it  is 
believed,  only  because  of  deficiency  in  its  conducting  power. 

3340.  There  can  be  no  doubt  that  very  much  is  involved  in 


Dec.  1854.] 


Places  of  weak  or  no  action. 


553 


these  phsenomena,  of  the  nature  of  which  we  have  little  or  no 
knowledge ;  and  the  results  obtained  by  Matteucci  will  probably 
lead  to  developments  and  discoveries  of  great  importance.  He 
states^  that  copper,  when  finely  divided,  presents  very  persisting 
phsenomena,  proving  its  right  to  be  considered  as  a  diamagnetic 
body ;  but  that  when  aggregated,  all,  or  nearly  all,  its  diamag- 
netic character  disappears.  Nothing  is  known  as  yet  of  the 
manner  in  which  the  mere  difierence  of  cohesion  or  division 
can  so  affect  the  diamagnetic  character.  He  finds,  too,  that  in 
other  respects,  as  in  Arago's  rotation,  particles  of  matter  act  in 
a  manner  not  to  be  anticipated  from  what  is  at  present  known 
of  them  as  masses ;  and  it  is  to  be  hoped  and  expected  that 
when  these  results  are  enlarged  and  developed,  we  shall  be  able 
to  form  a  better  judgement  of  the  true  physical  action  of  mag- 
netism than  at  present. 

Places  of  no  magnetic  action. 

3341.  The  essential  relation  and  dependence  of  the  two  mag- 
netic dualities  is  manifested,  I  think,  in  a  very  striking  manner, 
by  the  results  which  occur  when  we  attempt  to  isolate  northness 
or  southness,  by  concentrating  either  of  them  on  one  space  or 
piece  of  matter,  and  looking  for  their  presence  by  effects,  either 
of  tension  or  any  other  kind,  whether  connected  with  polarity 
or  not.  A  soft  iron  bar,  an  inch  square,  3  or  4  inches  long  and 
rounded  at  the  edges,  had  thirty-two  convolutions  of  covered 
copper  wire  0*05  of  an  inch  in  diameter  put  round  it,  so  that 
covering  the  middle  part  of  the  bar,  chiefly,  it  could  be  shifted 
if  needful  a  little  nearer  to  one  end  than  the  other  ;  such  a  bar 
could  be  rendered  magnetic  by  an  electric 
current  passed  through  the  wire,  and  a  Fig.  9. 

degree  of  adjustment,  in  the  strength  of  , 
the  N  and  S  extremities,  could  be  effected 
by  this  motion  of  the  iron  in  its  helix. 
Having  six  of  these,  it  was  easy  to  arrange 
them  with  their  lijke  poles  together,  so  as  to 
include  a  cubical  space  or  chamber,  fig.  9 ; 
and  in  this  space  I  worked  by  every  means 
at  my  disposal.    Access  to  it  was  easily 

obtained  by  a  previous  removal  of  a  portion  of  the  solid  angles 
'  Cours  special  sur  I'induction,  ^c,  1854,  pp.  166,  269. 


554  Some  points  of  magnetic  philosophy .    [Dec.  1854. 


of  the  ends  which  were  to  be  brought  together,  or  by  withdrawing 
the  electro-magnets  a  little  the  one  from  the  others,  and  then  a 
ray  of  light  could  be  passed  into  or  across  it ;  magnetic  needles 
or  crystals  of  bismuth  could  be  suspended  in  it;— a  ring  helix 
could  be  introduced  and  rotated  there  ;  and  the  motions  of  any- 
thing within  could  be  observed  by  the  eye  outside. 

334-2.  A  small  magnetic  needle  hung  in  the  middle  of  this 
space,  gave  no  indication  of  any  magnetic  power ;  near  the  open 
edges  and  angles  vibrations  occurred,  but  they  were  as  nothing 
compared  to  the  powerful  indications  given  outside  the  chamber; 
even  when  the  needle  was  many  inches  away.  A  crystal  of  bismuth 
was  entirely  indifferent.  A  piece  of  soft  iron  hung  on  a  jointed 
copper  wire  within  the  chamber  showed  no  trace  of  magnetic 
power,  whether  examined  by  the  little  needle  or  in  any  other 
manner.  Iron  filings  on  a  card  across  the  chamber  were  not 
affected  in  the  middle  part,  but  only  near  the  partly  open  angles. 
A  ring  helix  of  many  convolutions,  having  its  terminations  pass- 
ing out  at  opposite  corners,  was  connected  with  a  very  sensitive 
galvanometer  and  rotated ;  it  showed  no  trace  of  inductive  action. 
Numerous  other  experiments  were  made,  but  with  results  alto- 
gether negative.  Attempts  (though  desperate)  were  made  to 
ascertain  if  any  electro-chemical  conditions  were  induced  there, 
but  in  vain.  Every  kind  of  trial  that  I  could  think  of,  not 
merely  by  tests  of  a  polar  character,  but  of  all  sorts,  were  insti- 
tuted, but  with  the  same  negative  result. 

3343.  It  was  of  course  not  to  be  expected  that  any  polar,  i.  e. 
any  dually  related  polar,  action  could  be  exerted  in  this  place  ; 
but  if  the  polarities  can  exist  without  mutual  relation,  we  might 
surely  expect  some  condition,  some  tonic  or  static  state,  in  a 
chamber  thus  prepared  and  surrounded  with  a  high  intensity  of 
magnetic  power,  acting  in  great  concentration  on  one  particular 
spot  or  substance.  But  it  is  not  so ;  and  the  chamber  offers  a 
space  destitute  of  magnetic  action,  and  free,  under  the  circum- 
stances, from  magnetic  influence.  It  is  the  complete  analogue 
of  the  space  presented  within  a  deep  metallic  vessel  or  globe 
when  charged  with  electricity  (1174.).  There  is  then  no  elec- 
tricity within,  because  that  necessary  connexion  and  dependence 
of  the  electric  duals,  which  is  essential  to  their  nature,  cannot 
be.  In  like  manner,  there  is  no  appearance  of  magnetic  force 
>  Phil.  Mag.,  Oct.  1846,  vol.  xxix.  p.  267,  note. 


Dec.  1854.]        Places  of  weak  or  no  action.  555 

in  the  cubical  chamber,  because  the  duals  are  not  both  there  at 
once,  and  one  cannot  be  present  without  the  other. 

3344.  There  are  many  ways  of  examining  in  a  more  or  less 
perfect  manner  these  neutral  and  highly  instructive  magnetic 
places.    A  cavity  in  the  end  of  an  electro-magnetic  core  or  a 
permanent  magnet  will  present  similar  phsenomena,  and  in  some 
respects  even  more  perfectly ;  for  though  a  trace  of  power  will 
perhaps  appear  at  the  bottom  of  the  cavity,  the  sum  or  amount, 
as  compared  to  the  sum  of  power  at  the  end  of  the  magnet,  will 
show  how  complete  the  analogy  between  this  space  and  the  in- 
terior of  a  metallic  vessel  charged  with  positive  or  negative  elec- 
tricity is.    A  cylinder  of  soft  iron,  9  inches  in  length  and  1'6 
in  diameter,  had  a  chamber  0-9  in  diameter  and  1  inch  in 
depth  formed  in  one  extremity  concentric  with  the  cylinder; 
and  being  placed  in  a  powerful  helix  of  thick  copper  wire,  and 
associated  with  a  Grovels  battery  of  ten  pair  of  plates,  was  ready 
for  experiment : — a  like  chambered  magnet  can  be  prepared  by 
putting  a  proper  iron  ring  against  the  end  of  any  electro-  or 
ordinary  magnet,  and  will  show  the  phsenomena  I  am  about  to 
describe.    A  piece  of  soft  iron,  not  more  than  0*3  of  an  inch  in 
length  or  thickness,  held  at  the  end  of  a  copper  wire  and  brought 
near  the  outer  edge  of  the  excited  magnet  pole,  will  be  very 
strongly  attracted ;  but  if  it  be  applied  to  the  bottom  of  the 
chamber  it  will  present  no  such  effect,  but  be  quite  indifferent. 
If  applied  about  the  sides  of  the  chamber,  it  will  indicate  no 
effect  until  it  approaches  the  mouth.    If  the  magnet  be  placed 
horizontally,  and  a  piece  of  card-board  be  cut,  so  that  it  can 
enter  the  chamber  and  represent  a  horizontal  section  of  its 
cavity ;  and,  being  sprinkled  over  with  clean  iron  filings,  is  then 
put  into  its  position  and  the  magnet  excited  for  a  moment  that 
it  may  develope  its  power  over  the  chamber  and  filings  and  give 
them  their  indicative  position  ;  it  will  be  found  that  only  those 
near  the  mouth  have  been  driven  into  a  new  position  (about  the 
outside  angles  of  the  pole),  and  that  four-fifths  of  those  upon 
the  surface  of  the  card  within  the  chamber  have  been  left  un- 
affected, unmoved.    If  the  chamber  be  filled  with  iron  filings, 
closed  with  a  card,  placed  in  a  vertical  position  with  the  aperture 
downward,  and  the  magnet  be  then  excited  and  the  card  re- 
moved, the  filings  will  fall  out ;  as  they  come  out  they  will  be 
caught  away,  and  form  a  fine  fringe  round  the  external  angles 


556  Some  points  of  magnetic  philosophy.    [Dec.  1854. 

of  tlie  pole,  but  not  one  will  remain  at  the  bottom  of  the  chamber, 
or  even  anywhere  within  the  chamber,  except  near  to  its  external 
edge.  Yet,  if  a  piece  of  iron  long  enough  to  reach  out  of  the 
chamber,  as  a  nail  2,  3,  or  4  inches  long,  touch  the  hottom  of 
the  chamber,  it  is  strongly  attracted  and  held  there,  and  will 
support  a  weight  of  several  ounces,  though  prevented  from 
touching  the  chamber  anywhere  else  by  a  card  with  a  hole  in  it 
placed  over  the  mouth. 

3345.  If  a  small  magnetic  needle,  about  O'l  of  an  inch  long, 
be  brought  towards  this  excited  magnet,  it  is  almost  unmanage- 
able  by  reason  of  the  force  exerted  upon  it ;  but,  as  soon  as  it 
has  entered  the  chamber,  the  power  rapidly  diminishes,  and  at 
the  bottom  the  needle  is  scarcely,  if  at  all,  affected. 

3346.  If,  instead  of  the  core  and  chamber  described,  an  iron 
tube  of  sufficient  thickness  of  metal  (as  part  of  a  gun-barrel)  be 
employed,  then  like  effects  occur.  If  the  magnetic  needle  be 
introduced,  it  ceases  to  be  acted  upon  when  about  I'S  inch 
within  the  tube.  If  the  tube  be  more  or  less  filled  with  iron 
filings,  and  then  be  excited  and  held  vertical,  they  will  all  pour 
out  and  fall  away,  except  those  which  are  retained  at  the  external 
edges.  Yet,  if  a  long  nail  or  iron  rod  be  introduced,  so  as  to  be 
partly  out  of  the  cylinder,  then  it  will  be  strongly  attracted  at  the 
internal  point,  where  it  touches  the  iron  of  the  tube  core. 

3347.  The  realization  of  like  effects  by  grouping  together  the 
poles  of  ordinary  magnets  gives  most  interesting  results.  I  have 
four  very  hard  steel  magnets,  each  6  inches  in  length,  1  inch  m 
breadth,  and  0*4  nearly  in  thickness. 

When  the  four  like  poles  are  put  T'lg-  1^. 

together,  fig.  10,  they  form  a  flat 
square  chamber  in  the  same  plane  as 
that  of  the  magnets.  If  a  piece  of 
stiff  paper,  the  size  of  this  chamber, 
be  raised  on  a  block  0*2  of  an  inch 
high,  then  sprinkled  over  with  iron 
filings,  and  the  magnets  afterwards  approached  regularly  until 
the  square  chamber  is  formed,  a  little  tapping  on  the  card  will 
then  arrange  the  filings  in  lines  from  the  sides  of  the  square 
chamber  to  the  centre.  The  filings  show  at  once  the  direction 
of  the  lines  of  force  in  this  medium  plane,  and  their  greater 
abundance  at  the  middle  of  each  pole  than  at  the  re-entering 


Dec.  1854.]        Places  of  weak  or  no  action.  557 

angles ;  and  if  the  filings  be  then  removed  and  the  indication  of 
the  course  of  the  Hues  be  followed  out  by  a  small  magnetic 
needle,  it  will  be  found  that  the  lines  rise  upwards  from  this  plane 
above,  and  descend  from  it  below,  and  then  turn  back  upon  their 
course  in  the  free  space  over  and  beneath  the  arrangement 
towards  the  S  poles  of  the  difi'erent  magnets.  The  condition 
will  be  understood  in  a  moment,  by  considering  the  sphondyloids 
of  power  belonging  to  each  magnet  (3271.).  and  the  manner  in 
which  they  are  associated  when  the  four  like  poles  come  together. 

3348.  When  the  magnets  are  turned  edges  upwards,  they 
form  a  vertical  chamber  1  inch  high  and  „. 

only  0-4  of  an  inch  in  width,  and  now 
phsenomena  like  those  just  described  occur, 
but  only  near  the  entrances  to  the  chamber; 
as  the  little  needle  proceeds  into  the  en- 
closed space,  the  power  of  the  magnets  be- 
comes less  and  less,  and  at  the  middle  of 
the  chamber  scarcely  a  trace  remains ;  that 
place  beingjlike  the  closed  chamber,  formed  with  six  poles  (3341.), 
or  like  the  bottom  of  a  chamber  formed  in  the  end  of  a  magnetic 
pole,  a  neutral  place,  or  place  of  no  magnetic  action. 

3349.  The  transition  by  degrees,  from  a  pointed  conical  pole 
to  an  enclosed  chamber,  is,  from  the  results  described,  very  evi- 
dent ;  and  so  also  is  their  connexion  with  those  belonging  to  the 
numerous  neutral  places  produced  under  ordinary  circumstances 
(3234.  figs.  6,  10,  11, 15).  Not  the  slightest  difficulty  or  hesi- 
tation occurs,  when  these  results  are  read  or  considered  by  the 
principle  of  representative  lines  of  force ;  all  the  variations  in 
the  strength  of  the  magnetic  force  and  in  the  direction  appear 
at  once.  But  the  great  point  is  to  observe  how  they  all  concur 
in  showing  the  necessity  of  the  complete  and  equivalent  dual 
relation  of  the  magnetic  forces.  When  that  is  diminished  or 
interfered  with  in  any  degree,  in  the  same  proportion  does  the 
power  as  a  whole  become  diminished ;  until,  at  last,  it  absolutely 
disappears  from  a  given  place,  though  energies  of  the  strongest 
kind  are  directing  the  force  on  to  that  spot,  supposing  that  one 
of  the  dual  elements  could  exist  in  any  degree  without,  or  inde- 
pendent of,  the  other. 

3350.  When  formerly  working  with  bismuth  and  magnets,  I 
described  several  results  (2298.  2487.  2491.)  due  to  the  principle 


558  Some  points  of  magnetic  philosophy .    [Dec.  1 854. 


of  neutral  magnetic  places,  more  or  less  developed.  If  a  sphere 
or  cube  of  bismuth  be  delicately  suspended  by  a  vertical  suspen- 
sion or  on  a  torsion  balance,  and  an  N  pole  be  brought 
towards  it,  fig.  13,  the  bismuth  will  be  re- 
pelled and  the  suspension  deflected: — if  a 
second  N'  pole  be  brought  up^  as  in  the 
figure,  the  bismuth  will  be  less  repelled  by  N 
than  before,  will  return  towards  it,  and  N'  will 
also  seem  to  attract  it,  for  on  approaching 
the  bismuth  will  tend  to  go  into  the  angle 
formed  by  N  and  N'.  If  a  third  pole,  N",  be 
brought  up  on  the  opposite  side,  the  bismuth  will  then  seem  to 
be  attracted  by  it,  and  by  the  first  pole,  and  will,  in  fact,  return 
very  nearly  into  the  position  it  would  have  if  all  the  magnets 
were  away.  I  thought  at  one  time  that  magnetic  structure,  given 
by  the  second  north  pole  W  to  the  bismuth,  might  produce  the 
approximation  of  it  to  N,  and  if  so,  that  this  would  be  neutralized 
by  the  action  of  a  like  pole  N"  on  the  opposite  side,  and  so  the 
approximation  of  the  bismuth  (if  due  to  such  a  cause)  be  pre- 
vented. On  the  contrary,  however,  such  a  pole  increased  it; 
and  a  moment's  consideration,  by  showing  that  the  three  poles 
form  a  chamber  of  diminished  or  no  action  (3341.  3347.),  shows 
also  that  such  ought  to  be  the  case.  All  the  movements  of  the 
bismuth  are  the  result  of  the  tendency  which  it  has  to  pass 
from  stronger  to  weaker  places  of  magnetic  action  (2418.) ;  and 
in  the  present  case  they  show  that  weakened  place,  which  in  a 
higher  degree  would  be  a  place  of  no  magnetic  force. 

The  moving  conductor. 

3351.  I  wish  to  make  a  few  further  remarks  (3336.  3337.) 
upon  the  value  of  the  moving  conductor,  as  a  means  of  investi- 
gation in  magnetical  science.  It  will  be  sufficient  to  refer  to 
former  papers  for  a  statement  of  the  principles,  the  power, 
and  the  certainty  of  its  indications  (3156.  3172.  3176.  3270.). 
At  present,  I  desire  to  apply  it  in  a  direct  form  of  experi- 
ment, to  the  supposed  contrary  polarities  of  iron  and  bismuth 
(3309.). 

3352.  Four  metallic  spheres  of  copper,  bismuth,  soft  iron,  and 
hard  steel,  0*8  of  an  inch  in  diameter,  have  been  prepared  ;  each 
has  a  copper  axis  carrying  a  small  wooden  pulley,  so  that  when 


Dec.  1854.]  Moving  globes  of  copper,  bismuth,  iron,  steel.  559 

in  its  supporting  frame,  rotation,  more  or  less  rapid,  can  be  given 
to  it  by  the  band  of  a  multiplying  wheel ;  each  also  has  a  thin 
copper  ring  driven  tightly  on  to  it  at  the  equator,  which,  being 
grooved,  serves  to  retain  a  galvanometer  wire  pressed  against 
that  part  during  the  revolution  of  the  globe ;  the  other  wire 
meanwhile  being  held  against  the  copper  axis.  These  globes,  in 
then-  frame,  could  be  placed  one  by  one  in  the  magnetic  field  of 
a  powerful  permanent  Logeman 
magnet,  so  as  to  be  subject  to  I'ig-  13. 

the  magnetic  force,  fig.  13  ;  and 
then  rotated,  and  the  currents 
of  electricity  induced  in  them 
carried  to  galvanometers.  Two 
such  instruments  were  employed,  ''\_J 
one,  a  Euhmkorff's,  with  fine 

wire  (2651.),  the  other  with  a  thick  wire  of  only  four  revolutions 
(3178.).  The  latter  was  the  best,  but  both  gave  good  indications. 
The  position  of  all  things  concerned  was  preserved  undisturbed 
during  the  experiments,  so  that  it  will  not  be  necessary  to  do 
more  than  to  describe  a  standard  effect,  and  afterwards  refer 
other  effects  to  it.  This  standard  may  be  taken  from  the  current 
indicated  when  the  copper  globe  was  in  the  magnetic  field ;  and 
it  was  such,  when  the  upper  part  of  the  globe  moved  westward, 
as  to  send  the  south  ends  of  the  galvanometer  needles  to  the 
west  also :  eight  or  ten  revolutions  of  the  globe  would  cause  the 
needles  to  pass  through  80°  or  90°. 

3353.  The  soft  iron  sphere  was  placed  in  the  magnetic  field ; 
it  was  so  good  in  character  as  to  retain  very  slight  traces  of 
magnetism  when  taken  out  again.  Being  revolved,  it  gave  a 
cm-rent  of  electricity,  the  same  in  direction  as  that  of  the 
standard  or  copper  ball.  It  is  easy  to  understand,  that  if  the 
globe  be  moved  parallel  to  itself,  but  away  from  the  magnet,  in 
a  line  perpendicular  to  the  magnetic  axis  (as  into  the  dotted 
position,  3353.  fig.  13),  it  will  pass  through  places  of  weaker 
magnetic  action.  Under  such  changes  of  place,  the  induced 
current  was  weaker  or  stronger,  according  to  the  distance,  but 
always  in  the  same  direction.  Assuming  that  the  rotating  metal 
supplies  a  true  indication  of  the  polarity  or  direction  of  the 
magnetic  force  (3077.),  the  results  show  that  the  polarity 
of  the  force  which  induces  these  currents,  and  which  is  the 


560  Some  points  of  magnetic  philosophy.    [Dec.  1854. 

magnetic  force  of  the  dominant  magnet,  is  the  same  both  in  the 
copper  and  in  the  iron.  Other  cases  of  the  current  from  revolving 
iron  may  be  referred  to  in  the  Exp.  Res.  (3162.). 

3354.  The  bismuth  globe  vras  placed  in  the  magnetic  field. 
If  made  to  revolve  much,  vpith  the  galvanometer  w^ire  press- 
ing against  the  copper  equator  (3352.),  the  latter  became 
warm  by  friction,  and  a  permanent  thermo-current  was  pro- 
duced :  this  has  been  considered  on  a  former  occasion  (3168.). 
Its  effect  is  easily  eliminated  by  revolving  the  globe  a  given 
number  of  times  in  opposite  directions,  observing  the  two 
deflections,  adding  them  together,  and  taking  the  half  of  the 
sum  for  the  amount  of  induced  current  in  either  one  direction 
or  the  other ;  for  as  the  thermo-current  is  added  on  the  one  side 
and  subtracted  on  the  other,  such  a  process  gives  the  real 
amount  of  the  induced  current.  When,  however,  the  bismuth 
sphere  is  revolved  only  five  or  ten  times,  the  thermo-effect  is  so 
small  as  to  make  the  galvanometer  deflectioiT  very  little  more  in 
one  direction  than  in  the  other.  When  due  attention  was  given, 
the  rotation  of  the  bismuth  sphere  produced  an  induced  current  , 
in  precisely  the  same  direction  as  those  obtained  with  the 
copper  and  iron ;  and  so  far,  therefore,  it  indicated  precisely  the 
same  direction  of  polarity  for  the  magnetic  force  then  acting 
upon  and  in  it. 

3355.  The  hard  steel  sphere,  having  been  previously  examined 
by  a  small  needle  and  found  to  be  uumagnetized,  was  placed  in 
the  magnetic  field.  It  was  then  revolved,  and  gave  an  induced 
magneto-electric  current  in  the  same  direction  as  the  former 
currents.  Being  removed  and  again  examined  by  the  magnetic 
needle,  it  was  found  not  to  have  received  any  sensible  charge  of 
magnetism. 

3356.  So  these  four  metal  globes  indicate  like  polarity  of  the 
magnetic  force,  acting  upon  and  within  them,  when  examined 
thus  by  the  magneto-electric  current  due  to  movement  across  the 
lines  of  force.  By  researches  described  elsewhere,  it  is  known 
that  all  metals,  and  all  bodies  which  are  sufficiently  electro-con- 
ductors, down  even  to  aqueous  fluids,  give  the  same  direction  of 
the  magneto-electric  current :— it  is  never  reversed  without  re- 
version of  the  polarity,  and  reversion  of  the  polarity  always  re- 
verses the  current  induced. 

3357.  The  hard  steel  sphere  was  now  made  a  magnet,  and 


Dec.  1854.]    Spherical  magnet  and  sphere  of  bismuth.  561 

though  not  of  good  shape  to  retain  magnetism,  yet  because  of 
its  hardness  it  was  able  to  sustain  being  placed  in  the  magnetic 
field,  in  a  position  the  reverse  of  the  polarity  there,  and  yet  retained 
its  own  polarity;  for  when  taken  out  and  examined  by  a  magnetic 
needle,  the  polarity  was  found  to  be  the  same  as  before.  Such 
being  the  case,  it  seemed  to  me  that  this  magnet  might  be  em- 
ployed to  represent,  according  to  the  view  of  those  who  conceive 
that  iron  and  bismuth  are  polarized  in  opposite  directions  in  the 
magnetic  field,  both  iron  and  bismuth ;  inasmuch  as  it  could  be 
placed  in  the  field  in  that  condition  of  polarity,  which  these  are 
supposed  respectively  to  acquire  there.    The  globe  magnet  was 
therefore  placed  in  the  magnetic  field  in  a  position  conformable 
to  that  of  the  dominant  magnet,  i.  e.  with  its  N  pole  towards 
the  S  pole  of  the  magnet,  &c. ;  and  being  rotated,  it  gave  an 
induced  magneto-electric  current  like  that  of  the  standard  and 
of  iron  (3352.  3353.).    The  dominant  magnet  was  then  with- 
drawn to  a  distance  (3353.)  and  the  globe  rotated  by  itself;  it 
gave,  as  it  ought  to  do,  the  same  current  as  before ;  for  it,  by 
its  coercitive  force,  retains  permanently  that  state  of  polarity, 
which  the  iron  could  receive  only  temporarily  whilst  in  the  mag- 
netic field  :  being  now  turned  180°  in  a  horizontal  direction, 
the  globe  magnet  was  reversed  as  regarded  the  dominant  magnet 
(the  latter  being,  however,  still  at  a  distance),  and  now  the  globe 
magnet  gave  a  current  the  reverse  of  the  former,  or  of  the 
standard  current ;  and  yet  a  very  consistent  current  in  relation 
to  its  own  polarity. 

3358.  The  dominant  magnet  was  now  gradually  brought  up, 
and  its  efi'ect  on  the  reversed  globe  magnet  observed.  The  cur- 
rent from  the  latter  became  less  and  less,  and  at  last  was  in- 
verted, becoming  like  that  of  the  standard  current ;  nor  can  that 
be  wondered  at,  when  it  is  considered  that  the  dominant  magnet 
was  the  largest  supplied  by  Logeman  to  the  Great  Exhibition, 
and  able  to  sustain  a  weight  of  430  pounds,  and  the  sphere 
magnet  only  0-8  of  an  inch  in  diameter,  and  very  imperfectly 
hardened  in  the  interior.  But  when  the  dominant  magnet  was 
withdrawn  a  little,  a  place  was  soon  found  for  the  globe  magnet, 
where  its  rotation  in  either  direction  produced  no  current  at  all. 
Outside  of  this  place,  the  rotated  sphere  gave  a  current,  the  re- 
verse of  that  of  the  standard ;  whilst  the  iron  and  bismuth 
spheres  in  the  same  place,  gave  currents  alike  in  kind  and  the 

VOL.  III.  2  o 


562  Points  of  magnetic  philosophy.     [Dec.  1854. 

same  as  that  of  the  standard.  In  this  region,  therefore  (and  it 
is  like  the  whole  of  the  magnetic  field  of  many  mferior  yet  vei7 
powerful  magnets),  if  we  represent  bismuth  by  a  magnet,  re- 
versely polar,  as  bismuth  is  supposed  to  be,  we  obtam  mduced 
magneto-electric  currents,  not  like  those  of  bismuth,  but  the 
contrary ;  and  if  we  turn  the  representative  magnet  round,  so 
as  to  give  it  the  position  in  which  it  yields  currents  like  those 
of  the  bismuth,  then  its  polarity  contradicts,  or  is  the  reverse 
of  the  assumed  polarity  of  the  bismuth. 

3359.  Now  until  the  polarity  or  direction  of  the  magnetic 
force  which  determines  the  course  of  the  induced  magneto-elec- 
tric currents  produced  in  every  moving  conductor,  is  distin- 
guished and  separated  from  the  polarity  or  direction  which 
causes  movement  amongst  bodies  subjected  to  the  same  force, 
how  can  these  phcenomena  be  accounted  for  by  the  supposition 
that  the  bismuth  sphere  is  in  the  same  polar  condition  as  the 
reversed  globe  magnet  ?    The  reversed  magnet  is,  m  fact,  the 
contrary  to  bismuth  and  to  iron  ;-then  bismuth  and  iron  must 
be  the  same.    The  direct  magnet  is  the  same  as  the  bismuth,  in 
that  polarity  which  induces  a  current  ;-then  the  magnet  and  the 
bismuth  are  the  same.    How  easily  all  these  effects  present 
themselves  in  a  consistent  form,  if  read  by  the  prmciple  ot  re- 
presentative lines  of  force !    The  reversed  globe  magnet  at  a 
distance  from  the  dominant,  shows,  in  revolvmg,  the  etiect  oi 
the  lines  of  force  within  it  (3116.) ;  as  the  magnet  is  ap- 
proached, its  external  sphondyloid  of  power  is  compressed  in- 
wards (3338.  fig.  15),  and  at  last  the  magnet  is  self-contamed ; 
then  showing  the  equalization  of  its  own  powers,  and  as  yet  the 
absence  from  within  it  of  any  of  the  powers  of  the  chief  magnet ; 
so  that  it  gives  no  induced  currents,  though  m  a  place  where 
bismuth  and  iron  would  give  them  freely.     Withm  that  di- 
stance the  effect  of  the  superior  and  ovei-powering  force  of  the 
^reat  magnet  appears  (3358.),  which,  though  it  can  take 
partial  possession  of  the  little  magnet,  still,  when  removed 
suffers  the  force  of  the  latter  to  develope  itself  again,  and  present 
the  same  series  of  phsenomena  as  before. 

3300.  Van  Rees  admits,  I  believe,  that  the  movmg  wire 
shows  truly  the  presence,  direction,  and  nature  of  the  magnetic 
force  or  forces;  and  it  is  very  important  to  know  that  the  set- 
tbg  of  a  magnetic  needle,  or  crystal  of  bismuth,  and  theproduc- 


Dec.  1854.]  Polanty,  and  the  induced  electric  current.  563 

tion  of  a  current  of  electricity  in  a  moving  conductor,  are  like 
correlative  and  consequent  effects  of  the  magnetic  force ;  the 
power  of  producing  one  or  the  other  effect  being  rigidly  the  same. 
Philosophers  should  either  agree  or  differ  distinctly  on  this  point ; 
so  that  if  they  differ,  they  may  distinguish  clearly  the  physical 
sepai-ation  of  the  phenomena ;  which,  if  established,  must  lead 
to  new  and  important  discoveries.    The  polarity  direction  which 
the  moving  conductor  makes  manifest,  whether  that  conductor 
be  one  of  the  paramagnetic  or  diamagnetic  bodies  themselves,  or 
whether  it  be  a  conductor  moving  amongst  them,  either  by  itself 
or  with  them^  is  always  the  same.    The  electric  current  pro- 
duced never  indicates  a  change  in  the  direction  of  the  polarity, 
from  that  belonging  to  the  first  source  or  seat  of  the  power ; 
whether  it  be  a  magnet,  a  solenoid,  or  of  any  other  nature ;  the 
only  difference  being  in  the  strength  of  the  electric  current 
produced,  which  difference  is  directly  referable  to  the  electro- 
conducting  power  (3143.  3153.  3163.).    If  such  be  the  natm-al 
truth,  how  can  the  two  modes  of  indication  ever  give  opposite 
results?    If  opposite  results  seem  to  appear,  and  only  occa- 
sionally, is  it  that  mode  of  induction  which  gives  one  consistent 
result'that  we  should  doubt,  or  that  which  seems  to  be  incon- 
sistent with  itself  ?  especially  when  similar  contrary  phsenomena 
in  abundance  are  known  to  be  produced  by  bodies  having 
like  polarity  (3316.),  and  when  excellent  physical  reasons, 
founded  on  differential  action,  offer  themselves  for  their  ex- 
plication.   There  is  sufficient  reason  to  admit,  that  the  mag- 
netic needle  cannot  be  always  a  true  direct  indicator  of  the 
amount  or  the  direction  of  magnetic  action  (2868.  2870.  3]  56. 
3293.).    Should  we  not  therefore,  in  respect  of  the  above  phse- 
nomena,  rather  conclude,  for  the  time,  that  the  simple  and  uni- 
form results  of  the  one  mode  of  action,  are  the  true  indication ; 
and  that  where,  in  the  other  mode,  the  phsenomena  are  reversed 
or  doubled,  a  part  of  them  are  compound  in  their  nature  ?  I 
may,  in  conclusion,  remark,  that  the  effects  of  motion  and  those 
produced  in  the  action  of  magnetism  on  light,  are  never  reversed 
in  any  case,  whatever  the  medium  in  which  they  are  observed ; 
both  point  to  one  direction  of  polarity  only,  namely  that  of  the 
dominant  source  of  magnetism. 

3361 .  I  will  bring  these  imperfect  observations  to  an  end,  by 
a  veiy  brief  statement  of  what  I  suppose  to  be  the  condition  of 

2  o  2 


564  Points  of  magnetic  philosophy.     [Dec.  1854. 

a  magnet ;  and  by  a  disclaimer,  as  to  anything  like  conviction  on 
all  points  of  that  which  I  set  forth  as  a  supposition  tendmg  to 
lead  to  inquiry.    Contemplating  a  bar  magnet  by  itself,  I  see 
in  it  a  source  of  dual  power.    I  believe  its  dualities  are  essen- 
tially related  to  each  other,  and  cannot  exist  but  by  that  rela- 
tion.   I  think  that  though  related  through  the  magnet  by  sus- 
taining power,  they  are  not  so  related  by  discharging  or  inducmg 
power,  a  power  equal  in  amount  to  the  coercitive  or  sustammg 
power.    The  relation  externally  appears  to  me  to  be  through 
the  space  around  the  magnet ;  in  which  space  a  sphondyloid  of 
power  is  present  consisting  of  closed  curves  of  magnetic  force. 
That  the  space  is  not  magnetically  dark  (3305.)  appears  to  me 
by  this;  that  when  bodies  occupy  that  space,  having  hke  rela- 
tion by  known  pheenomena  to  the  power  as  the  space  has,  as 
copper,  mercury,  &c.,  they  produce  magneto-electric  currents 
when  moved.    When  bodies  (media)  occupy  the  space  around 
the  magnet,  they  modify  its  capability  of  transmitting  and  re- 
lating the  dual  forces  of  the  magnet,  and  as  they  mcrease  or 
diminish  that  capability,  are  paramagnetic  or  diamagnetic  m 
their  nature;  giving  rise  to  the  phsenomena  which  come  under 
the  term  of  magnetic  conduction  (2797.).    The  same  magnet 
can  hold  different  charges,  as  the  medium  connectmg  its  poles 
varies ;  and  so  one,  fully  charged  with  a  good  medium,  as  iron 
between  its  poles,  falls  in  power  when  the  iron  is  replaced  by 
air,  or  space,  or  bismuth.    Corresponding  effects  occur  with 
longer  or  shorter  magnets  (3290.),  or  with  magnets  made  thick 
by  adding  many  sideways  together  (3287.).    The  medium  about 
a  magnet  may  be  mixed  in  its  natm-e,  and  then  more  dual 
power  is  disposed  of  through  the  better  conductor  than  the  worse, 
but  the  whole  amount  of  power  remains  unchanged.   The  powers 
and  utility  of  the  media,  and  of  space  itself,  fail,  if  the  dual  force 
or  polar  action  be  interrupted.    The  magnet  could  not  exist  with- 
out a  surrounding  medium  or  space,  and  would  be  extinguished 
if  deprived  of  it,  and  is  extinguished,  if  the  space  be  occupied  ad- 
versely by  the  dual  power  of  a  dominant  magnet  of  sufficient  force. 
The  polarity  of  each  line  of  force  is  in  the  same  direction  through- 
out the  whole  of  its  closed  course.    Pointing  in  one  direction  or 
another,  is  a  differential  action  due  to  the  convergence  or  diver- 
gence  of  the  lines  of  force  upon  the  substance  acted  on,  according 
as  it  is  a  better  or  a  worse  conductor  of  the  magnetic  force. 


Dec.  1854.]        Difficulties — reservations.  565 

3362.  But  though  such  is  my  view,  I  put  it  forth  with  all 
the  reservation  made  on  former  occasions  (324-4,  3299.).  I 
do  not  pretend  to  explain  all  points  of  difficulty.  I  have  no 
clear  idea  of  the  physical  condition  constituting  the  charged 
magnetic  state;  i.  e.  the  state  of  the  source  of  magnetic 
power : — or  of  the  coercitivity  by  which  that  state  is  either 
resisted  in  its  attainment,  or  sustained  in  its  permanent  condi- 
tion ;  for  the  hypotheses  as  yet  put  forth  give  no  satisfaction 
to  my  mind.  I  profess  rather  to  point  out  the  difficulties  in 
the  way  of  the  views,  which  are  at  present  somewhat  too  easily 
accepted,  and  to  shake  men's  minds  from  their  habitual  trust  in 
them;  for,  next  to  developing  and  expounding,  that  appears  to 
me  the  most  useful  and  effectual  way  of  really  advancing  the 
subject : — it  is  better  to  be  aware,  or  even  to  suspect,  we  are 
wrong,  than  to  be  unconsciously  or  easily  led  to  accept  an  error 
as  right. 

Royal  Institution, 
20  Dec.  1854. 


566 


On  some  Points  of  Magnetic  Philosophy 

The  magnetic  and  electric  forms  of  power,  being  dual  in  their 
character,  and  also  able  to  act  at  a  distance,  will  probably  aid 
greatly  in  the  development  of  the  nature  of  physical  force 
generally ;  and  if  (as  I  believe)  the  dualities  are  essential  to 
the  forces,  are  always  equal  and  equivalent  to  each  other,  and 
are  so  mutually  dependent,  that  one  cannot  appear,  or  even 
exist  without  the  other,  the  proof  of  the  truth  of  such  condi- 
tions would  lead  to  many  consequences  of  the  highest  import- 
ance to  the  philosophy  of  force  generally.    A  few  brief 
experiments  with  the  electric  power  quickly  place  the  dual 
cases  before  the  contemplative  mind.    Thus,  if  a  metallic 
vessel,  as  an  ice-pail,  be  insulated  and  connected  with  a 
delicate  gold-leaf  electrometer,  or  other  like  instrument,  and 
then  an  insulated  metaUic  globe,  half  the  diameter  of  the  ice- 
pail,  be  charged  with  positive  electricity  and  placed  in  the 
middle  of  the  pail,  the  latter  being  for  the  moment  uninsu- 
lated by  a  touch  outside,  and  then  left  insulated  again,  the 
whole  system  will  show  no  signs  of  electricity  externally,  nor 
will  the  electrometer  be  affected ;  but  a  carrier  applied  to  the 
ball  within  the  vessel  will  bring  away  from  it  positive  electri- 
city, showing  its  particular  state  of  charge  ;  or  being  applied 
to  the  lower  inside  surface  of  the  vessel  will  bring  away 
negative  electricity,  proving  that  it  has  the  contrary  state  :  or 
the  duality  may  be  proved  by  withdrawing  the  ball,  when  the 
vessel  will  show  itself  negative  by  the  electrometer,  and  the 
ball  will  be  found  positive.    That  these  dualities  are  equal,  is 
further  shown  by  replacing  the  ball  within  the  vessel,  obser- 
ving the  electrometer,  bringing  the  ball  and  vessel  in  contact, 
and  again  observing  the  electrometer,  which  will  remain 
unchanged;  and  finally  withdrawing  the  ball,  which  comes 
away  perfectly  discharged,  and  leaves  the  vessel  externally  m 
its  unchanged  and  previous  state.    So  the  electric  dualities 
are  equal,  equivalent,  and  mutually  sustained.    To  show  that 
one  cannot  exist  alone,  insulate  the  metallic  vessel,  charge  it 
strongly  by  contact  with  the  machine  or  a  Lcyden  jar,  and 
1  Proceedings  of  the  Royal  Institution,  January  19,  1855. 


Jan.  1855.]    Magnetic  dualities— never  separated.  567 

then  dip  the  insulated  ball  into  it ;  and  after  touching  the 
bottom  of  the  vessel  with  the  ball,  remove  it,  without 
touching  the  sides  :  it  will  be  found  absolutely  free  from 
charge,  whatever  its  previous  state  may  have  been  ;  for  none 
but  a  single  state  can  exist  at  the  bottom  of  such  a  metallic 
vessel;  and  a  single  state,  i.  e.  an  unrelated  duality,  cannot 
exist  alone. 

The  correspondent  dualities,  i.  e.  the  northness  and  the 
southness,  of  the  magnetic  force  are  well  known.    For  the 
purpose  of  insulating,  if  possible,  one  of  these,  and  separating 
it  in  any  degree  from  the  other,  numerous  experiments  have 
been  made.  Thus  six  equal  electro-magnets,  formed  of  square 
bars,  were  put  together  in  the  direction  of  three  lines  perpen- 
dicular to  each  other,  so  that  their  inner  ends,  being  all  alike 
in  polarity,  might  enclose  a  cubical  space  and  produce  an 
experimental  chamber.    When  excited,  these  magnets  were 
very  powerful  in  the  outer  direction,  as  was  found  by  nails, 
fiUngs,  spirals,  and  needles  ;  but  within  the  chamber,  walled 
in  on  every  side  by  intense  north  poles,  there  was  no  power 
of  any  kind:  filings  were  not  arranged;  small  needles  not 
affected,  except  as  they  by  their  own  inducing  powers  caused 
arrangement  of  the  force  within  ;  revolving  wire  hehces  pro- 
duced no  currents ;  the  chamber  was  a  place  of  no  magnetic 
action.    Ordinary  magnetic  poles  of  hke  nature  produced 
corresponding  results.    A  single  pole  presented  its  usual 
character,  attracting  iron,  repelling  bismuth ;  a  Uke  pole,  at 
right  angles  to  it,  formed  a  re-entering  angle,  and  there  a 
weak  place  of  magnetic  action  was  caused;  iron  was  attracted 
from  it  to  the  prominent  corners ;  bismuth  moved  up  into  it ; 
and  a  third  like  pole  on  the  opposite  side  made  the  place  of 
weak  force  still  weaker  and  larger ;  another  pole  or  two  made 
it  very  weak  ;  six  poles  brought  it  to  the  condition  above 
described.    Even  four  poles,  put  with  their  longer  edges 
together, produced  a  lengthened  chamber  with  two  entrances; 
and  a  little  needle  being  carried  in  at  either  entrance  passed 
rapidly  through  spaces  of  weaker  and  weaker  force,  and  found 
a  part  in  the  middle  where  magnetic  action  was  not  sensible. 

Other  very  interesting  results  were  obtained  by  makmg 
chambers  in  the  polar  extremities  of  electro-magnets.  A 
cylinder  magnet,  whose  core  was  15  inch  in  diameter,  had 


568  Points  of  magnetic  philosophy.      [Jan.  1855. 

a  concentric  cylindrical  chamber  formed  in  the  end,  0*7  in 
diameter,  and  1*3  inch  deep.  When  iron  filings  were 
brought  near  this  excited  pole,  they  clung  around  the  outside, 
but  none  entered  the  cavity,  except  a  very  few  near  the  outer 
edge.  When  they  were  purposely  placed  inside  on  a  card  they 
were  quite  indifferent  to  the  excited  pole,  except  that  those  near 
the  mouth  of  the  chamber  moved  out  and  were  attracted  to 
the  outer  edges.  A  piece  of  soft  iron  at  the  end  of  a  copper 
wire  was  strongly  attracted  by  the  outer  parts  of  the  pole, 
but  unaffected  within.  When  the  chamber  was  filled  with 
iron  fihngs  and  inverted,  the  magnet  being  excited,  all  those 
from  the  bottom  and  interior  of  the  chamber  fell  out,  many, 
however,  being  caught  up  by  the  outer  parts  of  the  pole.  If 
pieces  of  iron,  successively  increasing  from  the  size  of  a  fiUng 
to  a  nail,  a  spike,  and  so  on  to  a  long  bar,  w^ere  brought  into 
contact  with  the  same  point  at  the  bottom  of  the  inverted 
chamber,  though  the  fiUng  could  not  be  held  by  attraction, 
nor  the  smaller  pieces  of  iron,  yet  as  soon  as  those  were 
employed  which  reached  to  the  level  of  the  chamber  mouth, 
or  beyond  it,  attraction  manifested  itself ;  and  with  the  larger 
pieces  it  rose  so  high,  that  a  bar  of  some  pounds  weight  could 
be  held  against  the  very  spot  that  was  not  sufficient  to  retain 
an  iron  fifing. 

These  and  many  other  results  prove  experimentally,  that 
the  magnetic  dualities  cannot  appear  alone  ;  and  that  when 
they  are  developed  they  are  in  equal  proportions  and  essen- 
tially connected.  For  if  not  essentially  connected,  how  could 
a  magnet  exist  alone?  Its  power,  evident  when  other 
magnets,  or  iron,  or  bismuth  is  near  it,  must,  upon  their 
removal,  then  take  up  some  other  form,  or  exist  without 
action:  the  first  has  never  been  shown  or  even  suspected; 
the  second  is  an  impossibility,  being  inconsistent  with  the 
conservation  of  force.  But  if  the  dualities  of  a  single  magnet 
are  thrown  upon  each  other,  and  so  become  mutually  related, 
is  that  in  right  lines  through  the  magnet,  or  in  curved  fines 
through  the  space  around  ?  That  it  is  not  in  right  lines 
through  the  magnet  (it  being  a  straight  bar  or  sphere)  is 
shown  by  this,  that  the  proper  means  as  a  helix  round  the 
magnet,  shows  that  the  internal  disposition  of  the  force 
(coercitive  or  other)  is  not  affected  when  the  magnet  is  exert- 


Jan.  1855.]    Polarity  of  bismuth,  iron,  steel,  S^c.  569 

ing  its  power  on  other  magnets,  or  when  left  to  itself  (Expe- 
rimental Researches,  31 19.  3121.  3215.  &c.) ;  and  like  means 
show  that  the  external  disposition  of  the  force  is  so  afFected  : 
so  that  the  force  in  right  lines  through  the  magnet  does  not 
change  under  the  circumstances,  whilst  the  force  in  external 
(and  necessarily)  curved  lines  does. 

The  polarity  of  bismuth  or  phosphorus  in  the  magnetic 
field  is  one  point  amongst  many  others  essentially  dependent 
upon,  and  highly  illustrative  of  the  nature  of,  the  magnetic 
force.  The  assumption  that  they  have  a  polarity  the  reverse 
of  that  of  paramagnetic  bodies  involves  the  consequence,  that 
northness  does  not  always  repel  northness  or  attract  southness; 
or  else  leads  to  the  assumption  that  there  are  two  northnesses 
and  two  southnesses,  and  that  these  sometimes  associate  in 
pairs  one  way,  and  at  other  times  in  the  contrary  way.  But 
leaving  the  assumptions  and  reverting  to  experiment,  it  was 
hoped  that  a  forcible  imitation  of  the  imagined  state  of 
bismuth  in  the  magnetic  field,  might  illustrate  its  real  state, 
and,  for  this  purpose,  recourse  was  had  to  the  indications 
given  by  a  moving  conductor.  Four  spheres  of  copper,  iron, 
bismuth,  and  hard  steel  have  been  prepared,  and  rotated  upon 
an  axis  coincident  with  the  magnetic  axis  of  a  powerful  horse- 
shoe magnet;  each  sphere  has  a  ring  of  copper  fixed  on  it  as  an 
equator,  and  the  ends  of  a  galvanometer  wire  were  brought  into 
contact  with  the  axis  and  the  equator  of  the  revolving  globe. 
Under  these  circumstances,  the  electric  current  produced  in 
the  moving  globe  was  conveyed  to  the  galvanometer,  and 
became  the  indicator  of  the  magnetic  polarity  of  the  spheres ; 
the  direction  of  rotation,  and  the  poles  of  the  magnet,  being 
in  all  cases  the  same.  When  the  copper  sphere,  as  a 
standard,  was  revolved,  deflection  at  the  galvanometer 
occurred  in  a  certain  direction.  When  the  iron  sphere 
replaced  the  copper  and  was  revolved,  the  deflection  at  the 
galvanometer  was  the  same.  When  the  bismuth  sphere  was 
employed,  the  deflection  .was  still  the  same : — and  it  still 
remained  the  same  when  the  steel  sphere  was  rotated  in  the 
magnetic  field.  Hence,  by  this  effect,  which  I  believe  to  be 
a  truthful  and  unvarying  indication  of  polarity,  the  state  of 
all  the  spheres  was  the  same,  and  therefore  the  polarity  of 
the  magnetic  force  in  the  iron,  copper,  and  bismuth,  in  every 


570  Points  of  magnetic  philosophy.      [Jan.  1855. 

case  alike.  (Experimental  Researches,  3164.  &c.)    The  steel 
sphere  was  then  magnetized  in  the  direction  of  its  axis,  and 
was  found  to  be  so  hard  as  to  retain  its  own  magnetic  state 
when  in  a  reverse  direction  between  the  poles  of  the  dominant 
magnet,  for  upon  its   removal   its   magnetism  remained 
unchanged.    Experiments  were  then  made  in  a  selected  posi- 
tion, where  the  dominant  magnetic  force  was  not  too  strong 
(a  magnet  able  to  lift  430  lbs.  was  used) — and  it  was  found 
that  when  the  steel  magnet  was  placed  in  accordance,  i.  e. 
with  its  north  pole  opposite  the  south  pole  of  the  dominant 
magnet,  the  deflection  was  in  the  same  direction  as  with  the 
bismuth  sphere ;  but  when  it  was  changed  so  as  to  be  in  the 
magnetic  condition  assigned  by  some  to  bismuth  [i.  e.  with 
reversed  polarities),  it  then  differed  from  bismuth,  producing 
the  contrary  deflection.    For  a  further  account  of  these  con- 
siderations and  investigations,  a  paper  may  be  referred  to, 
which  will  appear  in  the  Philosophical  Magazine ^ 
'  It  is,  probably,  of  great  importance  that  our  thoughts 
should  be  stirred  up  at  this  time  to  a  reconsideration  of  the 
general  nature  of  physical  force,  and  especially  to  those  forms 
of  it  which  are  concerned  in  actions  at  a  distance.  These  are, 
by  the  dual  powers,  connected  very  intimately  with  those 
which  occur  at  insensible  distances ;  and  it  is  to  be  expected 
that  the  progress  which  physical  science  has  made  in  latter 
tii^ies  will  enable  us  to  approach  this  deep  and  difficult  subject 
with  far  more  advantage  than  any  possessed  by  philosophers 
at  former  periods.    At  present  we  are.  accustomed  to  admit 
action  at  sensible  distances,  as  of  one  magnet  upon  another, 
or  of  the  sun  upon  the  earth,  as  if  such  admission  were  itself 
a  perfect  answer  to  any  inquiry  into  the  nature  of  the  physical 
means  which  cause  distant  bodies  to  affect  each  other ;  and 
the  man  who  hefeitates  to  admit  the  sufficiency  of  the  answer, 
or  of  the  assumption  on  which  it  rests,  and  asks  for  a  more 
satisfactory  account,  runs  some  risk  of  appearing  ridiculous 
or  ignorant  before  the  world  of  science.    Yet  Newton,  who 
did  more  than  any  other  man  in  demonstrating  the  law  of 
action  of  distant  bodies,  including  amongst  such  the  sun  and 
Saturn,  which  are  900  millions  of  miles  apart,  did  not  leave 
the  subject  without  recording  his  well-considered  judgement, 
»  See  ante,  p.  628  ;  or  Philosophical  Magazine,  1855,  vol.  ix.  p.  81. 


Jan.  1855.]    Gravitation — its  nature  considered.  571 

that  the  mere  attraction  of  distant  portions  of  matter  was  not 
a  sufficient  or  satisfactory  thought  for  a  philosopher.  That 
gravity  should  be  innate,  inherent,  and  essential  to  matter, 
so  that  one  body  may  act  upon  another  at  a  distance  through 
a  vacuum,  without  the  mediation  of  anything  else,  by  and 
through  which  their  action  and  force  may  be  conveyed  from 
one  to  another,  is,  he  says,  to  him  a  great  absurdity.  Gravity 
must  be  caused  by  an  agent,  acting  constantly  according  to 
certain  laws;  but  whether  this  agent  be  material  or  immaterial 
he  leaves  to  the  consideration  of  his  readers.  This  is  the 
onward-looking  thought  of  one,  who  by  his  knowledge  and 
like  quality  of  mind,  saw  in  the  diamond  an  unctuous  sub- 
stance coagulated,  when  as  yet  it  was  known  but  as  a  trans- 
parent stone,  and  foretold  the  presence  of  a  combustible 
substance  in  water  a  century  before  water  was  decomposed 
or  hydrogen  discovered;  and  I  cannot  help  believing  that 
the  time  is  near  at  hand,  when  his  thought  regarding  gravity 
will  produce  fruit : — and,  with  that  impression,  I  shall  venture 
a  few  considerations  upon  what  appears  to  me  the  insuffi- 
ciency of  the  usually  accepted  notions  of  gravity,  and  of  those 
forces  generally,  which  are  supposed  to  act  at  a  distance, 
having  respect  to  the  modern  and  philosophic  view  of  the 
conservation  and  indestructibility  of  force. 

The  notion  of  the  gravitating  force  is,  with  those  who 
admit  Newton's  law,  but  go  with  him  no  further,  that  matter 
attracts  matter  with  a  strength  which  is  inversely  as  the 
square  of  the  distance.  Consider,  then,  a  mass  of  matter  (or 
a  particle),  for  which  present  purpose  the  sun  will  serve,  and 
consider  a  globe  like  one  of  the  planets,  as  our  earth,  either 
created  or  taken  from  distant  space  and  placed  near  the  sun 
as  our  earth  is ; — the  attraction  of  gravity  is  then  exerted, 
and  we  say  that  the  sun  attracts  the  earth,  and  also  that  the 
earth  attracts  the  sun.  But  if  the  sun  attracts  the  earth,  that 
force  of  attraction  must  either  arise  because  of  the  presence  of 
the  earth  near  the  sun ;  or  it  must  have  pre-existed  in  the 
sun  when  the  earth  was  not  there.  If  we  consider  the  first 
case,  I  think  it  will  be  exceedingly  difficult  to  conceive  that 
the  sudden  presence  of  the  earth,  95  millions  .of  miles  from 
the  sun,  and  having  no  pi'evious  physical  connexion  with  it, 
nor  any  physical  connexion  caused  by  the  mere  circumstance 


572 


Points  of  magnetic  philosophy.      [Jan.  1855. 


of  juxtaposition,  should  be  able  to  raise  up  in  the  sun  a  power 
having  no  previous  existence.    As  respects  gravity,  the  earth 
must  be  considered  as  inert,  previously,  as  the  sun ;  and  can 
have  no  more  inducing  or  affecting  power  over  the  sun  than 
the  sun  over  it :  both  are  assumed  to  be  without  power  in  the 
beginning  of  the  case ;  how  then  can  that  power  arise  by 
their  mere  approximation  or  coexistence?    That  a  body 
without  force  should  raise  up  force  in  a  body  at  a  distance 
from  it,  is  too  hard  to  imagine ;  but  it  is  harder  still,  if  that 
can  be  possible,  to  accept  the  idea  when  we  consider  that  it 
includes  the  creation  of  force.    Force  may  be  opposed  by 
force,  may  be  diverted,  directed  partially  or  exclusively,  may 
even  be  converted,  as  far  as  we  understand  the  matter,  dis- 
appearing in  one  form  to  reappear  in  another ;  but  it  cannot 
be  created  or  annihilated,  or  truly  suspended,  i.  e.  rendered 
existent  without  action  or  without  its  equivalent  action.  The 
conservation  of  power  is  now  a  thought  deeply  impressed 
upon  the  minds  of  philosophic  men  ;  and  I  think  that,  as  a 
body,  they  admit  that  the  creation  or  annihilation  of  force  is 
equally  impossible  with  the  creation  or  annihilation  of  matter. 
But  if  we  conceive  the  sun  existing  alone  in  space,  exerting 
no  force  of  gravitation  exterior  to  it;  and  then  conceive 
another  sphere  in  space  having  hke  conditions,  and  that  the 
two  are  brought  towards  each  other ;  if  we  assume,  that  by 
their  mutual  presence  each  causes  the  other  to  act, — this  is  to 
assume  not  merely  a  creation  of  power,  but  a  double  creation, 
for  both  are  supposed  to  rise  from  a  previously  inert  to  a 
powerful  state.    On  their  dissociation  they,  by  the  assump- 
tion, pass  into  the  powerless  state  again,  and  this  would  be 
equivalent  to  the  annihilation  of  force.    It  will  be  easily 
understood,  that  the  case  of  the  sun  or  the  earth,  or  of  any 
one  of  two  or  more  acting  bodies,  is  reciprocal ; — and  also 
that  the  variation  of  attraction,  with  any  degree  of  approach 
or  separation  of  the  bodies,  involves  the  same  result  of  creation 
or  annihilation  of  power  as  the  creation  or  annihilation  (which 
latter  is  only  the  total  removal)  of  either  of  the  acting  bodies 
would  do. 

Such,  I  think,  must  be  the  character  of  the  conclusion,  if 
it  be  supposed  that  the  attraction  of  the  sun  upon  the  earth 
arises  because  of  the  presence  of  the  earth,  and  the  attraction 


Jan.  1855.]    Grcwitatiort—iis  nature  considered.  573 

of  the  earth  upon  the  sun,  because  of  the  presence  of  the 
sun ;  there  remains  the  case  of  the  power,  or  the  efficient 
source  of  the  power,  having  pre-existed  in  the  sun  (or  the 
earth)  before  the  earth  (or  the  sun)  was  in  presence.    In  the 
latter  view  it  appears  to  me  that,  consistently  with  the  con- 
servation of  force,  one  of  three  sub-cases  must  occur :  either 
the  gravitating  force  of  the  sun,  when  directed  upon  the 
earth,  must  be  removed  in  an  equivalent  degree  from  some 
other  bodies,  and  when  taken  off  from  the  earth  (by  the 
disappearance  of  the  latter)  be  disposed  of  on  some  other 
bodies;— or  else  it  must  take  up  some  new  form  of  power  when 
it  ceases  to  be  gravitation,  and  consume  some  other  form  of 
power  when  it  is  developed  as  gravitation;— or  else  it  must  be 
always  existing  around  the  sun  through  infinite  space.  The  first 
sub-case  is  not  imagined  by  the  usual  hypothesis  of  gravita- 
tion, and  will  hardly  be  supposed  probable  ;  for,  if  it  were 
true,  it  is  scarcely  possible  that  the  efiects  should  not  have 
been  observed  by  astronomers,  when  considering  the  motions 
of  the  planets  in  different  positions  with  respect  to  each  other 
and  the  sun.    Moreover,  gravitation  is  not  assumed  to  be  a 
dual  power,  and  in  them  only  as  yet  have  such  removals  been 
observed  by  experiment  or  conceived  by  the  mind.  The 
second  sub-case,  or  that  of  a  new  or  another  form  of 
power,  is  also  one  which  has  never  been  imagined  by  others, 
in  association  with  the  theory  of  gravity.    I  made  some 
endeavours,  experimentally,  to  connect  gravity  with  electri- 
city, having  this  very  object  in  view  (Phil.  Trans.  1851,  p.  1) ; 
but  the  results  were  entirely  negative.    The  view,  if  held  for 
a  moment,  would  imply  that  not  merely  the  sun,  but  all 
matter,  whatever  its  state,  would  have  extra  powers  set  up  in 
it,  if  removed  in  any  degree  from  gravitation;  that  the 
particles  of  a  comet  at  its  perihelion  would  have  changed  in 
character,  by  the  conversion  of  some  portion  of  their  molecular 
force  into  the  increased  amount  of  gravitating  force  which 
they  would  then  exert ;  and  that  at  its  aphehon,  this  extra 
gravitating  force  would  have  been  converted  back  into  some 
other  kind  of  molecular  force,  having  either  the  former  or  a 
new  character:  the  conversion  either  way  being  to  a  perfectly 
equivalent  degree.    One  could  not  even  conceive  of  the 
diffusion  of  a  cloud  of  dust,  or  its  concentration  into  a  stone, 


574  Gravitation — magnetism,  ^c.       [Jan.  1855. 

without  supposing  something  of  the  same  kind  to  occur ;  and 
I  suppose  that  nobody  will  accept  the  idea  as  possible.  The 
third  sub-case  remains,  namely  that  the  power  is  always 
existing  around  the  sun  and  through  infinite  space,  whether 
secondary  bodies  be  there  to  be  acted  upon  by  gravitation  or 
not ;  and  not  only  around  the  sun,  but  around  every  particle 
of  matter  which  has  existence.  This  case  of  a  constant 
necessary  condition  to  action  in  space,  when  as  respects  the 
sun  the  earth  is  not  in  place,  and  of  a  certain  gravitating 
action  as  the  result  of  that  previous  condition  when  the  earth 
is  in  place,  I  can  conceive,  consistently,  as  I  think,  with  the 
conservation  of  force:  and  I  think  the  case  is  that  which 
Newton  looked  at  in  gravity;  is,  in  philosophical  respects, 
the  same  as  that  admitted  by  all  in  regard  to  Ught,  heat,  and 
radiant  phaenomena ;  and  (in  a  sense  even  more  general  and 
extensive)  is  that  now  driven  upon  our  attention  in  an  espe- 
cially forcible  and  instructive  manner,  by  the  phaenomena 
of  electricity  and  magnetism,  because  of  their  dependence  on 
dual  forms  of  power. 


January  22,  1855. 


575 


Furthei'  Obsei-vations  on  associated  cases,  in  Electric  Induction, 
of  Current  and  Static  EffectsK 

Mellont,  whose  loss  science  must  deeply  feel,  was  engaged 
in  the  latter  part  of  his  life  in  investigations  relating  to  static 
electricity,  especially  concerning  induction,  conduction,  &c. 
He  desired,  in  reference  to  these  and  the  results  I  had  pub- 
lished respecting  the  charge  of,  and  conduction  by,  subter- 
raneous and  subaqueous  insulated  wires  ^  to  know  whether  there 
was  any  difference  in  the  time  of  transmission  through  such  wires, 
of  currents  having  greater  or  less  intensity,  i.  e.  of  currents  from 
batteries  of  different  numbers  of  plates.   I  applied  to  Mr.  Latimer 
Clark  on  the  subject ;  and  he,  with  the  same  earnestness  as  on 
the  former  occasion,  sought  and  seized  the  opportunity  of  making 
experiments  of  the  like  kind,  and  gave  me  the  results,  which  I 
sent  to  Melloni.    The  latter  pubhshed  them  with  some  observa- 
tions in  an  Italian  Journal  (whose  title  is  not  on  the  paper 
which  he  sent  to  me),  and  soon  after  he  was  suddenly  removed 
from  us  by  death.    As  Mr.  Clark's  results  are  not  yet  known 
in  this  country,  I  have  thought  that  a  brief  account  of  them 
would  be  valuable.    His  process  records,  by  the  printing  tele- 
graph of  Bain,  the  results  obtained  with  768  miles  of  copper 
wire  covered  with  gutta  percha,  and  laid  in  the  ground  in  four 
hnes  between  London  and  Manchester,  so  connected  that  the 
beginning  and  the  end  of  the  whole  length  was  in  London. 
The  following  are  his  words,  dated  May  31,  1854 : — 

"  I  have  tried  a  few  experiments  on  the  relative  velocities  of 
currents  of  different  intensities,  and  I  enclose  you  some  strips  of 
paper  showing  the  results.  1  was  unable  to  equalize  the  deflec- 
tions of  a  galvanometer  by  currents  of  intensity  with  small  plates 
as  compared  with  currents  from  a  few  large  plates,  for  no  size 
of  plate  would  make  up  for  the  deficiency  in  intensity.  I  allude 
to  the  form  of  experiment  suggested  by  Melloni ; — but  I  believe 
they  will  be  of  interest  to  him. 

"  The  experiments  were  made  through  768  miles  of  gutta 
percha  wire,  viz.  from  London  to  Manchester  and  back  again 

'  From  the  Philosophical  Magazine  for  March  1855. 
'  Ante,  page  608 ;  also  Royal  Institution  Proceedings,  i.  345  ;  or  Phil. 
Mag.  1864,  vii.  p.  197. 


576  Subterraneous  telegraph  wires.     [Feb.  1855. 

twice,  with  our  ordinary  sulphate  of  copper  batteries,  plates 
3  inches  square,  and  with  intensities  varying  from  31  cells  to 
sixteen  times  31  cells,  or  500  cells. 

"  In  the  accompanying  strips  the  upper  line  indicates  the 
time  during  which  the  current  was  sent,  being  made  by  a  local 
arrangement. 

"The  second  line  (of  dots)  indicates  time  by  seconds,  hdn^ 
made  by  a  pendulum  vibrating  seconds,  and  striking  a  light 
spring  at  the  centre  of  its  arc  of  vibration. 

"The  third  Hne  indicates  the  time  at  which  the  current 
appeared  at  (what  we  may  call)  the  distant  end  of  the  line,  768 
miles  off. 

"  The  fourth  line  merely  shows  the  residual  discharge  from 
the  near  end  of  the  wire,  which  was  allowed  to  communicate  with 
the  earth  as  soon  as  the  batteries  were  disconnected ;  this  has  no 
reference  to  the  subject  of  our  inquiries. 

"  It  will  be  seen  by  the  third  line,  that  about  two-thirds  of  a 
second  elapsed  in  every  case  before  the  current  became  apparent 
at  the  distance  of  768  miles,  indicating  a  velocity  of  about  1000 
miles  a  second;  but  the  most  interesting  part  appears  to  be,  that 
this  velocity  is  sensibly  uniform  for  all  intensities  from  31  cells 
to  500." 

Melloni  has  then  given  a  copy  of  the  records  made  when  31  pair 
and  500  pair  of  plates  were  employed ;  unfortunately  the  copy 
is  inaccurate,  since  it  makes  the  fourth  line  commence  as  to  time 
at  the  termination  of  the  third,  whereas  it  ought  to  correspond 
with  the  termination  of  the  first ;  also  the. third  line  on  each  does 
not  thin  off  as  those  upon  the  record  do.  The  following  is  a  copy 
from  other  slips  obtained  at  the  same  time  from  the  Bain's  plant- 
ing apparatus.  Experiments  with  62,  125,  and  250  cells,  gave 
like  results  with  those  of  31  and  500  cells. 

31  cells. 


500  cells. 


After  certain  observations,  which  are  mainly  upon  the  manner 
of  the  experiments,  and  the  way  in  which  practical  difficulties 


Feb.  1855.]        Time  of  the  electric  wave.  ^11 

were  avoided,  Melloni  says,  '^t  appears,  fhen,  that  when  the 
electric  current  possesses  sufficient  force  to  overcome  the  sum  of 
the  resistance  offered  by  a  given  conductor,  whatever  its  length 
may  be,  an  augmentation  of  its  intensity  ten  or  twentyfold  does 
not  alter  the  velocity  of  its  propagation.  This  fact  is  in  open 
contradiction  with  the  general  meaning  attributed  to  the  deno- 
minations of  quantity  and  intensity,  since  the  first  compares  the 
mass  of  electricity  to  that  of  a  fluid,  and  the  second  represents 
its  elasticity  or  tendency  to  motion.  The  equal  velocity  of  cur- 
rents of  various  tension  offers,  on  the  contrary,  a  fine  argument 
in  favour  of  the  opinion  of  those  who  suppose  the  electric  current 
to  be  analogous  to  the  vibrations  of  air  under  the  action  of  sono- 
rous bodies.  As  sounds,  higher  or  lower  in  pitch,  traverse  m 
air  the  same  space  in  the  same  time,  whatever  be  the  length  or 
the  intensity  of  the  aerial  wave  formed  by  the  vibration  of  the 
sonorous  body ;  so  the  vibrations,  more  or  less  rapid  or  more  or 
less  vigorous,  of  the  electric"  fluid  excited  by  the  action  of  bat- 
teries of  a  greater  or  smaller  number  of  plates,  are  propagated 
in  conductors  with  the  same  velocity.  Every  one  will  see  how 
the  hypotheses  imagined  by  us  to  give  a  reason  for  natural  phse- 
nomena,  will  serve  to  suggest  certain  experimental  investigations, 
the  results  of  which  will  test  their  validity  or  insufficiency.-" 

Melloni  then  says  that  he  shall  shortly  have  occasion  to  pubhsh 
facts  which  clearly  demonstrate  the  errors  of  certain  conclusions 
admitted  up  to  the  present  time  respecting  electro-static  indue 
tion ;  and  I  am  aware,  from  written  communications  with  him, 
that  he  considered  the  results  arrived  at  by  Coulomb,  Poissou, 
and  others  since  their  time,  as  not  accordant  with  the  truth  of 
nature^.  In  the  mean  time  he  died,  and  whether  his  researches 
are  svifficiently  perfected  for  pubhcation  or  not,  I  do  not  know. 

»  He  says,  "  I  deceive  myself  much,  or  else  the  fundamental  theorem  of 
electrical  induction,  as  we  find  it  ordinarily  announced,  ought  to  be  modi- 
fied so  as  not  to  confound  two  effects  completely  distinct— the  electric  state 
during  induction,  and  after  the  contact  and  separation  of  the  inducing  body. 
We  know  perfectly  what  occurs  in  the  latter  case,  but  not  in  the  former," 
&c.     Again,  "  In  my  last  letter  I  raised  doubts  with  regard  to  the  con- 
sequences which  have  up  to  the  present  been  deduced  fi-om  the  exijenments 
serving  as  a  base  for  the  fundamental  theorem  of  electro-static  induction. 
These  doubts  have  passed  to  a  state  of  certitude  in  my  mind,  ......  aud 

behold  me  at  this  time  thoroughly  convinced  that  the  enunciation  of  that 
theorem  ought  to  be  essentially  modified."  (July  1854.) 

VOL.  III.  ,  2  P 


578  Subterraneous  telegraph  wires.     [Feb.  1855. 

The  uniformity  in  the  time  and  appearance  of  currents  of 
different  intensities  at  the  further  end  of  the  same  wire  in  the 
same  inductive  state^  is  a  very  beautiful  result.    It  might  a<t  first 
be  supposed  to  be  in  opposition  to  the  views  I  set  forth  some 
years  ago  on  induction  and  conduction,  and  the  statements  more 
recently  made  with  regard  to  time.    That,  however,  does  not 
appear  to  me  to  be  the  case,  as  a  few  fui'ther  observations  on  Mr. 
Clark's  recent  experiments  will  perhaps  show.   "\^Tien  the  smaller 
battery  is  used,  much  less  electricity  passes  into  the  wire  in  a 
given  time,  than  when  the  larger  one  is  employed.    Suppose  that 
the  batteries  are  so  different  that  the  quantities  are  as  1  to  10 ; 
then,  though  a  pulse  from  each  would  take  the  same  time  for 
transmission  through  the  wire,  still  it  is  evident  that  the  wire 
would  be  a  tenfold  better  conductor  for  the  weak  current  than 
for  the  strong  one ;  or  in  other  words,  that  a  wire  having  only 
one-tenth  of  the  mass  of  that  used  for  the  greater  current  should 
be  employed  for  the  smaller  one,  if  the  resistance  for  equal  quan- 
tities of  electricity  having  different  intensities  is  to  be  rendered 
equal. 

My  views  connect  the  retardation  of  the  transmitted  current 
with  the  momentary  induction  set  up  laterally  by  the  insulated 
and  externally  coated  wire.  The  induction  will  be  proportionate 
to  the  intensity,  and  therefore  its  especial  effect  on  the  time  of 
retardation  proportionately  diminished  with  the  less  intense  cur- 
rent,—a  result  of  action  which  will  aid  in  rendering  the  time  of 
retardation  of  the  two  currents  equal. 

The  difference  of  time  in  the  former  experiments  with  air  wires, 
and  earth  or  water  wires,  very  clearly  depends  upon  the  differ- 
ence of  lateral  induction;  the  air  wire  presented  a  retardation 
scarcely  sensible,  the  earth  wire  one  amounting  to  nearly  two 
seconds.  If  the  insulating  layer  of  gutta  percha  could  be  reduced 
from  0-1  to  O-OI  of  an  inch  in  thickness,  and  mercury  could  be 
placed  on  the  outside  of  that  instead  of  water  or  earth,  I  do  not 
doubt  that  the  time  would  be  still  more  increased.  Yet  there  is 
every  probabihty  that  in  any  one  of  these  varying  cases,  electric 
currents  of  high  and  of  low  intensity  would  appear  at  the  end  of 
the  same  long  wire  after  equal  intervals  of  time. 

Mr.  Clark's  results  may  be  stated  thus :— A  given  quantity  of 
electricity  at  a  high  intensity,  or  a  smaller  quantity  at  a  propor- 
tionally lower  intensity,  will  appear  at  the  further  end  of  the 


Feb.  1855.]        Time  of  the  electric  wave. 


579 


same  wire  after  the  lapse  of  the  same  period  of  time.  My 
statement  assumed  the  discharge  of  the  same  quantity  at  different 
intensities  through  the  same  wire,  and  the  quantities  in  the  illus- 
trative experiments  were  measured  by  a  Leyden  jar.  In  the 
consideration  and  further  development  of  these  results,  it  must  be 
remembered  that  it  is  not  the  diflFerence  either  in  time,  velocity, 
or  transmission  of  a  continuous  current  which  constitutes  the 
object  in  view,  for  that  is  the  same  both  for  an  air  wire  and  a 
subterraneous  wire,  but  it  is  the  difference  in  the  first  appearance 
only  of  the  same  current  when  wires  under  these  different  con- 
ditions are  employed.  After  the  first  appearance  both  wires  are 
alike  in  power  unto  the  end  of  the  current,  and  then  a  difference 
again  appears  which  is  complementary  to  the  first. 

There  are  many  variations  of  these  experiments  which  one 
would  wish  to  make,  if  possible,  and  perhaps  by  degrees  the  pos- 
sibility, or  else  equivalent  experiments  in  other  forms,  may  occur. 
If  the  wire  employed  were  changed  from  a  cylinder  to  a  flat 
ribbon  of  equal  weight,  or  to  several  small  wires,  all  being  equally 
coated  with  gutta  percha  and  submerged,  differences  would  pro- 
bably arise  in  the  time  of  delay  with  the  same  current ;  and  I 
think  that  the  ribbon,  presenting  more  induction  surface  than  the 
cylinder,  would  cause  more  delay ;  but  probably  any  one  of  these, 
or  of  like  varieties,  would  cause  the  same  delay  for  currents  of 
different  intensities.  Again,  one  can  scarcely  doubt  that  with 
different  conducting  substances,  as  iron  and  copper,  the  delay 
would  vary,  as  is  the  case  in  the  transmission  of  sound  and  hght. 
That  the  delay  for  currents  of  high  and  low  intensity  should  be 
the  same  for  the  same  wire  in  any  one  of  such  cases  may  still  be 
expected,  but  it  would  be  very  interesting  to  know  what  would 
be  the  fact. 

The  prosecution  of  these  results  and  the  principles  concerned 
in  them,  through  the  various  forms  they  may  assume  by  such 
like  variations  of  the  conductors  and  also  of  the  currents,  offers, 
as  Melloni  has  observed,  most  extensive  and  interesting  inquiries : 
even  the  power  of  a  current  to  induce  a  current  in  neighbouring 
wires  and  conductors  is  involved  in  the  inquiry,  and  also  the 
phsenomena  and  principles  of  magneto-electric  induction. 

Royal  Institution, 
Feb.  7,  1855. 


INDEX. 


N.B.  A  dash  rule  represents  the  italics  immediately  preceding  it.  The  references  are 
sometimes  to  the  individual  paragraph,  and  sometimes  to  that  and  such  as  succeed  it. 
Those  which  follow  p.  or  pp.  are  to  pages,  the  others  to  the  paragraphs  of  the  Experimental 
Researches. 


Action  at  a  distance  considered,  p.  570. 
Air,  action  of  magnets  on,  2400,  2432. 
—  attracted  in  water,  2406. 

 unseparated  by  magnetism,  ja.  484. 

Air,  its  magnetic  character,  2791,  2853, 
pp.  476,  484. 

 affected  by  heat,  2855,  2859,  pp.  473, 

/  485. 

Annual  variation,  2882,  2947. 
Antimony,  diamagnetic,  2295. 
Antimony,  magnecrystallic,  2508. 

 ,  motion  arrested,  2512,  2526. 

 ,  revulsive  action,  2513,  2526. 

Arsenic,  its  magnecrystallic  action,  2532. 
Associated  magnets,  their  state,  3215,  3218. 
Associated  cases  of  cun-ent  and  static  effect, 
p.  508. 

Assumptions,  magnetic,  3301,  3311,  3317, 
3326. 

Atmosphere,  its  magnetic  character,  2853, 

2863,  2963. 
 ,  its  probable  action,  2864,  2917,  2920, 

2934,  2997. 
Atmospheric  magnetism,  2453,  2796,  2847, 

2997,  j3.  323, 

 ,  general  principles,  2997, 2917,  2878. 

 ,  laws  of  its  action,  2969. 

 ,  experimental  analogies,  2969,  2997. 

 ,  eflfect  of  cooled  air,  2864,  2917,  3003, 

3240. 

 ,  effect  of  heated  air,  2877,  2939,  3240. 

 ,  variation  upward,  2878,  2941. 

 ,  —  in  different  latitudes,  2881. 

 ,  by  pressure,  2952. 

 ,  by  wind,  2954. 

 ,  by  rain  or  snow,  2955. 

 ,  annual  variation,  2882,  2947,  3001. 

 ,  diurnal  variation,  2892,  2920,  3000. 

 ,   at  night,  3002. 

Axial  and  equatorial,  2252. 

Bismuth,  diamagnetic,  2295. 
— ,  its  motions  at  the  magnet,  2297,2308. 
VOL.  III. 


Bismuth,  its  static  magnetic  condition,  3319. 

 ,  liquid,  subjected  to  magnetism,  2502, 

2572. 

 sphere  revolved,  3354,^.  569. 

-;  at  the  magnet,  in  powder,  2302,  2304. 

 ,  in  various  media,  2301. 

 ,  surrounded  by  iron,  2301. 

 ,  two  pieces,  no  mutual  action, 

2303. 

 ,  its  magnecrystallic  action,  2454. 

Bismuth  crystals,  form  and  cleavage,  2474. 
 ,  their  magnetic  position,  2475,  2480, 

2574,  2840. 

 ,  affected  by  iron,  2487. 

 ,  magnets,  2491. 

 act  upon  a  magnet,  2567. 

 ,  non-magnecrystallic,  when  hot,  2570. 

 retain  no  magnetic  power,  2504. 

 exert  no  mutual  action,  2582. 

 ,  and  the  eaith  power,  2581. 

Bismuth,  its  magnetic  polarity,  3309. 

 ,  same  as  iron  and  copper,  3164,  3168. 

 ,  same  as  a  direct  magnet,  3358. 

 ,  supposed  reverse  of  iron,  3310. 

 ,  ,  involves  four  sorts  of  magnetism, 

3311. 

 ,   ,  involves  contradictory  conclu- 
sions, 3311. 

 ,  ,  involves  idea  of  perpetual  motion, 

3320. 

Blood,  diamagnetic,  2281,  2285. 
Bodies  not  changed  in  volume  by  magnetism, 
2752. 

Bodies,  their  static  magnetic  condition, 
3318. 

Bubbles  of  gases  magnetized,  2758,  2765. 

 ,  oxygen,  2766. 

 ,  nitrogen,  2765. 

Calcareous  spar  and  magnets,  2595,  2600, 
2842. 

Cape  of  Good  Hope  variations,  3035,  3069, 
tables. 

2  Q 


582 


INDEX. 


Carbonic  acid  gas,  its  magnetic  characters, 
2857. 

Chamber  of  no  magnetic  action,  3341. 

 feeble  magnetic  action,  3344,  3347, 

3350. 

Circular  polarization,  magnetic,  2230. 

 ,  essentially  different  to  the  natural,  2231. 

Cobalt,  heated,  its  magnetic  state,  p.  444. 
Conduction  and  induction,  connected,  j».  513. 
Conduction,  magnetic,  2797,  2843,  3281. 
Conduction,  magnecrystallic,  2836. 
Conductor,  moving,  3351,  3360, 
Conductors  of  magnetism,  their  effect,  2806, 
2828 

 ,  paramagnetic,  2807,  2814,  2828. 

 ,  diamagnetic,  2807,  2815,  2829. 

Conservation  of  force,  3325. 
Continuity,  its  effect  in  magnetism, 462. 
Copper,  a  magnetic  medium,  3339. 
Copper  block  attracted  and  repelled,  2338. 
Copper  acted  on  ltymagnets,2309,2323,  2411. 

 ,  peculiar  actions,  2310,  2317,  2326, 

2333 

 ,  revulsion,  2315,  2336,  2411. 

Crystalline  polarity  o/ bismuth,  2457. 

 antimony,  2508. 

 arsenic,  2532. 

 various  bodies,  2535. 

 salts,  2547. 

 calcareous  spar,  2594. 

 sulphate  of  iron,  2615,  2546,  2554. 

 red  ferro-prussiate  of  potassa,  2560. 

Crystalline  particles  in  solution,  their  mutual 

relation,  2578. 
Crystals,  magnetic  rotation  of  light  in,  2177. 
Current  and  static  eflfects,  associated,  p.  508. 
Curved  lines  of  magnetic  force,  3323,  3336. 

DeUneation  of  lines  of  magnetic  force,  3234. 

Diamagnetism,  2243,  2417. 

Diamagnetic  action,  its  nature,  ^417,  ^4^/. 

Diamagnetic  body  defined,  2149,  2790. 

Diamagnetic  and  paramagnetic  bodies  distin- 
guished, 458. 

Diamagnetic  condition  of  flame  and  gases, 
pp.  467,  487. 

 ^  of  smoke,  jwjy.  469,  487. 

Diamagnetic  curves,  2270. 

Diamagnetic  force,  relation  to  distanccjw.SU*. 

Diamagnetic  motions, 2253,2257, 2259, 22/ 1. 

Diamagnetic  order,  2284,  2307,  2399. 

Diamagnetic  pointing,  2258,  2282- 

Diamaqiietic  polarity,  2429. 

 ,  its  nature,  2497,  2640,  2820. 

  examined  by  inductive  currents  pro- 
duced, 2655,  2663. 

 effects  of  approach  and  recession, 

2640,  2665. 

 effects  of  tmie,  2()81. 

 division,  2Qb9.' 

 into  discs,  2659,  2',61. 


Diamagnetic  polarity  examined  by  division 
into  wires,  2659,  2662. 

 shortening  the  cores,  2657. 

 helices,  2668. 

 velocity,  2681. 

Diamagnetic  polarity,  supposed  proofs  doubt- 
ful, 2689, 3311,  3320. 
Diamagnetic  substances,  2275,  2279. 

 ,  list  of,  2280,  2399. 

 acted  on  by  magnets,  2275. 

 ,  suspension  of,  2248. 

 ,  ,  precautions,  2250. 

 ,  division  of,  2283,  2302. 

 ,  antimony,  2295. 

 ,  bismuth,  2295. 

 ,  crystals,  2278. 

-,  fluids,  2279, 


 ,  metals,  2291, 2295,  2425. 

 ,  phosphorus,  2277,  2284. 

Differential  magnetic  action,  2361,  2422, 

2757,  2405,  3298,  3316. 
Direction,  axial  and  equatorial,  2252. 
Discs,  metallic,  revolving  in  Unes  of  force, 
3169,  3167. 

 of  non-conductors,  3171. 

Disintegration,  its  effect  in  magnetism,^.  462. 
Disposition  of  magnetic  force,  3305. 
Distance,  differences  vrith  different  bodies, 
p.  503. 

Diurnal  variation,  2892,  2920. 
Dual  forces,  p.  440. 

 always  equal  and  dependent,  3324. 

Dualities,  electric,  p.  566. 

 ,  their  equality,  p.  566. 

Dualities,  magnetic,  3323,  3341,  567. 

Earth,  interior,  its  magnetic  state,i?.  446. 
Electric  currents,  their  action  on  hght,  2189, 
2170. 

Electric  induction,  p.  508. 
Electric  and  magnetic  forces,  their  relation, 
3265. 

Electric  dualities,  p.  566. 

Electric  lines  of  force,  2149,  3249,^.  440. 

Electric  rotation  of  light,  2189,  2195. 

 ,  law  of,  2109. 

 in  fluids,  2201,2183. 

 in  uon  tubes,  2209. 

 in  rotating  bodies,  2204. 

 in  various  bodies,  2211. 

Electrical  use  of  gutta  percha,  p.  494. 
Electricity,  light  and  magnetism,  cases  ot 

non-action,  2216. 
Electricity,  natural  standard,;;.  4b^. 
 ,  its  possible  relation  to  gra^^ty,  2/02, 

2717. 

 ,  its  velocity  of  conduction,  pp.  514, 576. 

Electro-magnet,  the  great,  2247. 

 ,  Woolwich  helix,  2246. 

Electro.tonic  state,  3172,  3269, 
Equatorial  and  axial,  2252. 


INDEX, 


583 


Flame,  its  diamagnetic  condition,  pi>.  467, 
487,490. 

 surrounding  currents  of  air,  p.  471.  j 

Fluids,  magnetic  rotation  of  liglit  in,  2183.  ; 
Fluids,  their  non-e.xpansion  in  the  magnetic 

field,  2172.  ^  I 

Force,\i%  necessary  conseiTation, 3326,^;. 571. 

 ,  magnetic  lines  of,  3300. 

Force,  physical,  considered,  p.  570. 

 ,  gravity,  3245,  p.  570. 

Forces  of  nature,  their  unitj',  2702. 
Forces  acting  at  a  distance,  3245,  p.  570. 
Fort  Simpson,  variations,  2914,  296S,  tallies. 
Fuse  for  electrical  mining,^.  519. 

Galvanometer  of  thick  wire,  3123,  3l;>7, 
3178. 

 ,  influential  circumstances,  3124,  3179. 

 ,  value  of  its  indications,  3184. 

 ,  contacts,  3126. 

Gases  do  not  expand  by  magnetism,  2718, 

2750,  2756. 

 ,  no  magnetic  rotation  of  light  in,  2180. 

 ,  their  magnetic  character,  2785,  2792, 

p.  467. 

 affected  magnetically  by  heat,  2855, 

p.  485. 

 ,  action  of  magnets  on,  2400,  2432. 

 ,  their  magnetic  relation,  jojB.  474,  480. 

 ,  wr,pp.  476,  481,  483. 

 ,  ammonia,  jo/;.  479,  485. 

 ,  bromine  vapour,  jw.  479. 

 ,  carbonic  acid,  pp.  477,  481. 

 ,  ,  hot,  j!;.  485. 

 ,  carbonic  oxiAe,pp.  477,  481. 

 ,  chlorine,/).  479- 

 ,  coal-gas,  pp.  478,  483. 

 ,  ,  hot,  p.  486. 

 ,  cyanogen,/).  479. 

 ,  hydriodic  acid,  p.  478. 

 ,  hydrogen,  pp.  477,  481,  482,  485. 

 ,  ,  hot,jo.  485. 

 ,  iodine  vapour,  ju.  479. 

 ,  muriatic  acid,  jo/?.  478,  485. 

 ,  nitrogen,/?/?.  476,  481,  483,  4!S5. 

 ,  nitric  o.\ide,/>.  478. 

 ,  nitrous  oxide,/?/?.  478,  481,  483. 

 ,  nitrous  acid  gas,/?.  478. 

 ,  defiant  gas,/?/;.  478,  485. 

 ,  oxygen,  pp.  476,  481,  483,  485. 

 ,  ,  hot,/?.  485. 

 ,  sulphurous  acid,/?.  478. 

Gases  in  the  magnetic  field  examined,  2723, 
2728,  2734,  2770. 

 by  a  ray  of  light,  2723. 

 in  close  vessels,  2730,  2737, 2743, 2749. 

 as  bubbles,  2758,  2765. 

— ■ — ,  hydrogen  in  air,  2740. 

 ,  no  currents,  2754. 

Glass,  heavy,  2151,  2176,  2214. 
Globemagnet,its  condition, 3331, 3357,/). 570. 


Gravitating  force,    Newton's  conclusion, 

3305,  note. 

 considered,  p.  570. 

 ,  cases  of  its  action,  p.  570. 

 ,  its   possible  relation   to  electricity, 

2702,  2717. 

 ,  its  lines  of  force,  3245. 

Greenwich  variations,  2011,  3018. 
Gutta  percha,  its  electrical  uses,  p.  494. 

Heat,  its  effect  on  the  magnetium  of  gases, 

2856,/?.  485. 

 air,  285  J,  2859,/(/?.  471,  485. 

 carbonic  acid,  2857. 

 nitrogen,  2858. 

 oxygen,  2861. 

Heavy  glass,  2151,  2176,  2214. 

 ,  action  of  magnets  on,  2253,  2273. 

 points  eqnatorially,  2253,  2264. 

 is  repelled  bodily,  2259,  2265,  2266. 

 ,  rotation  of  light  in  it,  2152,  2171. 

Hflicesfor  electric  action  on  light,  2190,2213. 
Hobarton  variations,  2896,  2948,  3027. 
Hypotheses  of  magnetic  force,  3301,  3303, 

p.  524. 

Illumination  of  magnetic  lines  of  force,  2146. 
Induced  magneto-electric    currents,  2327, 
2526. 

 ,  their  force,  2514,  note. 

Induction,  electric,/?.  508. 
Induction  dependent  upon  intervening  parti- 
cles, 2240. 

Induction  and  conduction  connected,/?.  513. 
Induction  of  magneto-electric  currents,  3087, 
3270. 

Insulation  and  conduction,  connected,/?.  513. 
Insulation  by  gutta  percha,  /?  494. 
Intensity  and  quantity,  p.  519. 
Iron,  hot,  is  magnetic,  2344. 
Iron,  copper,  bismuth,  have  like  polarity, 
3164,  3168,  3356,/?.  569. 

Lake  Athabasca  variations,  29 13, 2968,  tables. 
Law  of  the  electric  rotation  of  light,  2199. 
Law  of  inverse  square  of  the  distance,/?.  503. 
Law  of  magnecrystallic  action,  2479,  2464. 
Law  of  the  magnetic  rotation  of  light,  2155, 
•   2160,  2175,  2200. 

Light,  electricity  and  magnetism,  cases  of 

non-action,  2216. 

 ,  its  magnetic  affection,  p.  453. 

 ,  by  repeated  rcfle.\ions,/?.  453. 

 ,  magnetization  of,  2146,  2221. 

 affected  by  electricity,  2189,  2221. 

 affected  by  magnets,  2146,  2152,  2157, 

/?.  453. 

 ,  magneto-rotation  of,  2428. 

 ,  time,/?.  466. 

 ,  gases,/?.  489. 

Lines  of  force,  3245,  p.  450. 

2q2 


584 


INDEX. 


Lines  of  electric  force,  2149. 

 dynamic  electricity,  3276. 

Lines  of  force,  physical,  3303,  pp.  438,  566, 
570. 

 ,  of  light,  j^.  439. 

 ,  of  electricity,  p.  440. 

 ,  of  magnetism,  3303,  i3jt;.  438,  441,506, 

528. 

Lines  of  magnetic  force,  2149,  3070,  3122, 

3174,3243,3300,^9.  566. 
 defined,  3071. 

 ,  their  definite  character,  3073,  3103, 

3109,  3121,  3129,  3165,  3199,  3232. 
-,  distribution  within  a  magnet,  3084, 


Lines  of  magnetic  force,  their  physical  cha- 
racter, a  state  of  tension,  3269. 

 ,  manifested  by  moving  conductors,  3270. 

 ,  competency,  3273. 

 ,  disposition,  3273. 

 ,  refraction,  3274. 

■,  condensation,  3275. 


3116, 3120,  3273. 
-,  distribution  through  space,  3084, 3099, 


3129, 3274. 

 ,  their  physical  character,  3075,  3243, 

3273 

 ,  polarity  of,  3072,  3154,  3157. 

 J  true  representatives  of  nature,  3074, 

3122,  3174,  3243. 
 ,  the  unit,  3122. 

 are  closed  currents,  3117,  3230,  3264. 

•  delineated,  3234. 

 recognized,  3076. 

by  induction  of  currents,  3077, 


3083,  3123,  3159,  3177. 

-,  advantages 


3078,  3115, 

3116,3156,3176,3280". 
 ,  thick  wire  galvanometer, 

3123,  3178. 

 ,  magnet  and  wire  revolving  together 

3084,  3091,  3095. 
 ,  separately,3094,3095,3097,3106 

   ,  effect  o/time,  3104, 3114, 3135 

 —chstance,3107,  3109, 3111 

 ,  ,  velocity,  3108,  3114,  3135 

 and  wires  of  different  thicknesses,  3133, 

3141,  3191,  3203. 

 in  diflferent  planes,  3140. 

 of  different  substances,31 43,3152. 

 ,  effect  of  masses,  3137,  3150. 

 in  varying  juedia,  3292. 

 through  hot  and  cold  nickel,  3240 

 round  an  electric  current,  3239. 

 of  associated  magnets,  coalesce,  3226. 

 ,  no  increase  of  force,  3227. 

 ,  their  course  through  one  or  more  mag- 
nets, 3230. 

 of  opposed  magnets,  3233. 

 ■,  their  physical  character,  3243,  3269, 

3273,  3297. 

 ,  ,  relation  to  time,  3253. 

 ,  in  curved  lines,  3254,3258,3261, 

3263,3297,3323. 

 ,  ,  their  amount  limited,  AIM. 

 ,  ,  dependent  relation  of  the  pola- 
rities, 3257,  3323.  .  ^ 

,  relation  to  lines  of  electric  force, 


Lines  of  terrestrial  magnetic  force,  2849. 
— ,  their  disposition  in  the  atmosphere, 
2865,  2919. 

 ,  their  quantity  and  intensity,  2870. 

Logeman  magnet,  p.  498. 

Magnet,  its  physical  condition  considered, 
3257,  3273. 
•,  its  independent  condition,  3331,  3357, 


3336,  3361. 
— ,  its  internal  constitution,  3117. 
— ,  its  relation  to  the  space  around  it, 
3278,  3284. 
•,  its  external  disposition  of  power,  3305, 


3265. 


3332,  3336,  3361. 

 ,  globular,  its  condition,  3331,  3357, 

p.  570. 

 ,  tubular,  its  character,  3346 

 ,  lines  of  force  within  it,  3100,  3116, 

3120. 

 ,  around  it,  3099,  3101,  3117. 

 ,  its  examination  by  induced  currents, 

3177,  3215, 
 ,   .,  when  associated  with  other 

magnets,  3215. 
Magnets,  variable  and  invariable,  3224. 

 ,  supersaturated,  3285. 

 ,  action  of  the  keepers,  3283. 

 J  their  surrounding  medium,  3278. 

 ,  varied,  3292. 

 ,  proportion  of  small  to  large,  3286. 

 ,  influence  of  shape  and  size,  3282, 3287. 

 ,  over-long,  3290. 

 ,  associated,  3294. 

 ,  their  analogy  to  voltaic  batteries,  3228, 

3276,  3282. 

 ,  habitations  of  lines  of  force,  3295. 

 ,  definite  amount  of  tlieir  power,  3121, 

3215. 

 J  when  associated  with  other  mag- 
nets, 3218. 

 ,  their  action  on  light,  2146,  2152,  2157, 

2170  2609. 

 ,  their  action  on  heavy  glass,  2253,  22/3. 

 ,  repel  it,  2259,  2265,  2266. 

-,  their  action  on  metals,  &c.,  228/ , 


2309,  2333. 

_L_  au-  and  gases,  2400,  2432. 


 ;  antimony,  2391,  2306,  2508. 

 ,  arsenic,  2383,  2532. 

  bismuth,  2392,  230(5,  2457. 

 ,  abismnthsphere,2298,3354,;;.569. 

■  ,  cerium,  2373. 

 ,  chromium,  2374. 


INDEX. 


585 


Magnets,  their  action  on  cobalt,  2351,  2358. 

 copper,  2537. 

 earths,  2395. 

 gold,  2540. 

 iridium,  2386,  2542. 

 hot  iron,  2344. 

 compounds  of  iion,  2349. 

 siUphate  of  iron,  2546,  2554,  2615. 

 lead,  2378,  2539. 

 magnetic  salts,  2352. 

 magnetic  solutions,  2357,  2361. 

 manganese,  2372. 

 nickel,  2346,  2350,  2358. 

 nitrogen,  2770,  2783,  2854,  2858. 

 osmium,  2385. 

 oxygen,  2770,  2780,  2793,  2861,  2966, 

p.  476, 

 paUadium,  2382. 

 platinum,  2379. 

 rhodium,  2387,  2542. 

■  snver,  2390. 

 sodium,  2393. 

 tellurium,  2541. 

 tin,  2538. 

 titanium,  2371,  2536. 

 tungsten,  2389. 

 zinc,  2535. 

 compounds  of  magnetic  metals,  2349, 

2379. 

 cold  metals,  2348. 

Magnecrystallic  action,  2454,  2479,  2550. 

 ,  not  attraction  or  repulsion,  2551. 

Magnecrystalhc  conduction,  2836. 
Magnecrystallic force,  24  69,2550, 2585, 2836. 
 ,  its  law,  2479. 

 ,  its  nature,  2562,  2576,  2624,  2836. 

 ,  not  measurable  by  vibration,  2529. 

 ,  compared  to  radiant  force,  2591. 

MagnecrystaUic  polarity,  2454,  2550,  2624, 
2639, 

Magnetic  action,  new,  2243,  2343,  2417. 

 at  different  distances,  p.  503. 

 ,  differential,  2365,  2405,  2438,  2757. 

 ,  terrest/rial,  2447. 

 by  contiguous  particles,  2443. 

 on  copper,  &c.,  2309,  2333. 

 ,  places  of  none,  3341. 

 ,  places  of  feeble  force,  3344,  3347, 

3350, 7^  567. 

 ,  ,  bismuth  there,  3350. 

Magnetic  assumptions,  3317,  3301,  3311, 

3326. 

Magnetic  attraction  and  repulsion,  its  phy- 
sical cause,  3280. 

Magnetic  chamber  of  no  force,  3341, />.  567. 

Magnetic  condition  of  gases,  pp.  474,  480. 

 of  all  matter,  2226, 2243, 2286,  p.  457. 

Magnetic  conduction,  2797,  2843,  3281. 

 ,  polarity,  2818,  2835,  3166,  3307. 

Magnetic  conductors,  their  action  in  the 
magnetic  field,  2810,  2828,  2839,  3313. 


Magnetic  curves  delineated,  3234. 
Magnetic  dualities,  3257,  3323,  ^U\,p.  567. 

 never  alone,  3257,  p.  567. 

 ,  related  in  curved  lines,  3258,  3336, 

p.  568. 

 ,  not  related  through  the  magnet,  3332, 

3260,;^.  568. 
Magnetic  effect  of  disintegration,  p.  462. 
Magnetic  field,  condition  of  metals  in,  3172. 

 ,  disturbed  by  conduction,  2806,  2831. 

 of  equal  force,  2463,  2465. 

Magnetic  force,  observations  on,  p.  497. 

 ,  its  disposition,  3305. 

 ,  its  relation  to  light,  2221. 

 ,  its  physical  nature,  3301,  3303. 

 ,  turned  in  various  directions,  3328. 

 ,  relation  to  distance,  p.  504. 

 ,  no  loss  by  distance,  3111. 

 ,  never  single,  3277. 

 ,  lines  of,  3300. 

 ,  reasons  for  considering  it  anew,  3305. 

Magnetic  forces,  dual,  3257,  3323. 

 ,  are  always  equal,  3324. 

 ,  essentially  connected, 3258,3327, 3331, 

3341. 

 ,  never  destroyed,  3325,  3330. 

 ,  their  conservation,  3325. 

 ,  definite  in  amount,  3328. 

 ,  never  appear  separated,  3258,  3329, 

3341. 

 ,  not  compensated  through  the  magnet, 

3260,  3332,  3335. 

 ,  are  in  curved  lines,  3258,  3336. 

Magnetic  forces  examined  by  induced  cur- 
rents, 3177. 

 galvanometer  employed,  3178. 

 ,  value  of  its  indications,  3184, 

3133. 

 ,  metallic  loops  employed,  3184. 

 ,  those  of  the  earth,  3192. 

 ,  by  moving  rings,  3212. 

 ,          by  moving  rectangles,  &c.,  3192. 

 ,  of  different  sizes,  3195,3211. 

 ,  of  different  substances,  3231 . 

 ,  of  different  thicknesses, 

3201,  3203,  3208,  3231. 
 ,  at  different  velocities,  3196, 

3200,  3202. 

 ,  of  different  forms,  3198. 

 ,   ,    of  several  convolutions, 

3206. 

Magnetic  and  electric  forces,  their  relation, 
3265. 

Magnetic  hypotheses,  3301,  3303,  ji;.  524. 
Magnetic  lines  of  force,  2149.    See  Lines  of 
magnetic  force. 

 ,  their  relation  to  light,  2146,  2223. 

 of  the  earth,  2449,  2849, 7;.  324. 

 in  the  atmosphere,  2847,  p.  325. 

Magnetic  media,  their  actions,  3313,  3337, 
500. 


586 


INDEX, 


Magnetic  media,  point  as  if  polar,  3313. 

 ,point  either  equatoriallyor  axially,33I5. 

 give  differential  results,  3316. 

 at  rest  and  in  motion,  3160,  3337, 

3351. 

Magnetic  needle  not  a  perfect  measure  of 

earth's  force,  2871. 

 fails  in  its  indications,  3280,  3293. 

Magnetic  order  of  bodies,  2424. 
Magnetic  philosophy,  points  of,  3300. 
Magnetic  pointing  east  and  west,  2258, 2269, 

2282 

Magnetic  polarity,  3304,  3307,  3360. 

 ,  various  meanings  and  interpretations, 

3307. 

 defined,  3154. 

 ,  its  nature,  2832,  3154. 

  not  always  shown  by  attractions  and 

repulsions,  3155. 
 is  shown  by  the  induced  currents,  3156, 

3158, 3164. 

 in  afield  of  equal  force,  3157. 

 not  shown  by  a  magnetic  needle, 

3157. 

 shown  by  revolving  discs,  3159. 

— —  shown  by  revolving  spheres,  3360,/;.  569. 
 alike  in  iron,  copper,  bismuth,  &c., 

3164, 3356. 

 ,  true  reverse  cases,  3321,  3357. 

 of  copper,  3352. 

 of  iron,  335  '■. 

 of  bismuth,  3354,  3309. 

 not  reverse  of  a  magnet,  3358. 

 of  hard  steel,  3355. 

 of  hard  magnet,  3357- 

 of  differing  solutions,  3316. 

Magnetic  pole,  wire  moving  round  it,  3272. 
Magnetic  poles,  association  of  like,  3347. 
Magnetic  poles  pierced,  jo.  487. 
Magnetic  pole  chambers,  3341,^9.  567. 
Magnetic  relations  of  metals,  p.  444. 
Magnetic  repulsion  without  polarity,  2274. 
Magnetic  revulsion,  2315,  2336,2514,  2516, 

2684. 

Magnetic  rotation  of  light,  its  law, 2155,  2160, 

2175,  2200. 

 ,  its  peculiarities,  2231. 

 related  to  time,  2\1^,p.  466. 

  increases  with  the  diamagnetic,  2163. 

 intensity  of  the  magnetic  force, 

2164. 

 occurs  with  various  bodies,  2165, 2173. 

 not  affected  by  motion,  2\GQ. 

 intervention  of  extra-diamagnetic 

bodies,  2167. 
 is  affected  by  the  intervention  of  iron, 

2168. 

 in  bodies  generally,  2173,  2189,  2215, 

2609. 

 crystalhne  bodies,  2177,  2237, 456. 

 fluid  bodies,  2183,  2194. 


Magnetic  rotation  of  light  not  in  gases,  2 186 
2212,  2237,  jo.  456. 

 in  rotating  bodies,  2187,  2235. 

 in  heavy  glass,  2152,  2171. 

 by  repeated  reflexions,  p.  453. 

Magnetic  scale.  Centigrade,^.  501. 

Magnetic  scale  of  bodies,  j».  502, 

Magnetic  solutions,  relative  actions  of,  2357, 
2361,  3313. 

 ,  their  action  at  the  pole,  p.  462. 

Magnetic  state  requires  time  for  its  assump- 
tion, 3319,/;.  466. 

Magnetic  storms,  2958. 

Magnetic  variations  of  the  earth,  2847,j!>.326. 

Magnetism,  tested  for,  2290. 

 does  not  change  volume  of  bodies,  2752. 

 does  notexpand  gases,  2718,2750,2756. 

 ,  its  zero,  pp.  465,  488. 

 ,  electricity  and  hght,  cases  of  non- 
action, 2216. 

 ,  atmospheric,  2796,  2847,  2997,/;.  323. 

 ,  transverse,  pp.  458,  464. 

Magnetization  of  hght,  2146,  2221. 

Magneto-electric  currents,  induced,  2327, 
3087,  3270. 

 induction,  nature  of  its  action,  2690. 

Man  is  diamagnetic,  2281. 

Manganese,  its  magnetic  condition,  2372, 
p.  445. 

Matter  and  force,  p.  448. 

Matter,  all  is  magnetic,  2243,  2286. 

 ,  a  new  magnetic  condition  of,  2227, 

2242,  2274,  2286,  2417. 

 ,  its  relation  to  magnetism,  2226,  2286, 

2443. 

 ,  and  light,  2224. 

Media,  their  relative  magnetic  action,  2405, 

2414,  3313. 
—  ,  their  magnetic  relation,  3313,/;.  500. 

 ,  magnetic,  considered,  3313,  3337. 

Medium  about  a  magnet,  considered,  3278. 
Metallic  spheres  in  the  magnetic  field,  3352, 

p.  569. 

Metals  acted  on  by  magnets,  2287. 

 ,  then-  condition  in  the  magnetic  field, 

3172. 

 ,  their  magnetic  order,  2399. 

 ,  their  magnetic  relations,  p.  444. 

 ,  cooled,  their  magnetic  state,  445. 

 ,  heated,  their  magnetic  state,;;.  444. 

 ,  different  under  induction,  3145,  3152, 

3164, 

 ,  magneto-electric  currents  induced  in, 

2294,  2309,  2327,  2340. 

 ,  ,  their  feeble  intensity,  3123. 

Metals,  diamagnetic,  2291,  2295,  2425. 

 ,  heated,  2397. 

Metals,  magnetic,  2288,  2292,  2425. 
 ,  cooled,  2398. 

Mining  by  electricity — the  fuse,/;.  519. 
Moving  conductors,  3076,  3159,  3351,  3360. 


INDEX. 


587 


Moving  conductors  in  the  magneticfield,3270. 
Moving  magnetic  media,  3159,  3337,  3351. 
Moving  wire,  its  value  as  au  examiner,  3176. 

 ,  its  magnetic  indications,  J9.  442. 

 ,  results,  3338. 

Mutual  magnetic  acti&n  of  bodies,  2814. 

Newton's  conclusion  as  to  gravitating  force, 
3305,  note,  J!?.  571. 

New  magnetic  actions,  2243,  2343,  2417. 

New  magnetic  condition  of  matter,  2227, 
2242,  2274,  2286. 

Nickel,  its  magnetism  at  different  tempera- 
tures, 2346,  3240. 

Nitrogen,  its  magnetic  character,  2770, 2783, 
2854,  2858. 

Non-expansion  of  gases  in  the  magnetic  field, 
2718,  2750,  2756. 

 fluids  in  the  magnetic  field,  2172. 

Nuclei  of  matter,  p.  449. 

Observations  on  the  magnetic  force,  p.  497. 
Oxygen,  its  magnetic  character,  2770,  2780, 

2793,  2861,  2966,  476. 
Oxygen  bubble,  magnetic,  2766. 

Paramagnetic  bodies  defined,  2790. 

 and  diamagnetic  bodies  distinguished, 

p.  458. 

Peroxide  of  iron,  its  magnetic  behaviour, 
p.  459. 

Perpetual  motion,  if  bismuth  reversely  polar- 
ized, 3320. 

Phosphorus,  diamagnetic,  2277,  2284. 

 ,  its  magnetic  polarity,-^.  569. 

Physical  force  considered,  3245,  j9.  570. 

Physical  character  of  magnetic  force,  3303. 

Physical  lines  offeree,  3243,^9.  439. 

 of  gravity,  3245,^.  571. 

 of  radiant  agencies,  3247. 

 of  static  electricity,  3249,  3264. 

 of  dynamic  electricity,  3250,  3276. 

 of  magnetic  force,  3243, 3251, 3i'M0,pp. 

438, 441, 506.  See  Lines  of  magnetic  force. 

Places  9f  force,  3306. 

Places  of  no  magnetic  action,  3341,  jw.  568. 
Pointing,  magnetic,  east  and  west,  2258,2269. 
Points  of  magnetic  philosophy,  on,  3300, 
p.  566. 

PoZanVy.magnetic,  3154,3307.  See  Magnetic 

polarity. 
— >—,  of  Ijismuth,  3309. 

 ,  diamagnelic,  2429. 

 ,  ,  its  nature,  2497,  2640,  2820. 

 ,  magnecryslallic,  2454,  2550. 

 ,   ,  its  nature,  2639. 

Polarity  of  magnetic  conduction,  2818, 2835, 

3166. 

Quantity  and  intensity,/?.  519. 


Ray-vibrations,  thoughts  on,  p.  447. 
Radiant  Unes  of  force,  3247. 
Rectangles  and  rings,  revolving,  3192,  3212. 
Relation  of  natural  forces,  2146,  2221, 2238. 
Repulsion,  magnetic,  without  polarity,  2274. 
Revulsion,  magnetic,  2315, 2336, 2514,  2516, 
2684. 

Rotation  of  a  ray  of  light  by  magnetism, 
2154. 

Scale,  Centigrade,  of  magnetic  bodies,  jw.  501. 
Singapore  variations,  3058,  3069,  tables. 
Smoke,  its  diamagnetic  condition,  pp.  469, 
487. 

Soap-bubbles  of  gases,  magnetized,  2758, 
2765. 

Space,  its  magnetic  relations,  2400,  2787. 
Speculation  regarding  physical  lines  of  force, 
3244. 

Spheremagnet,directandreverse,3357,j».570. 
Spheres,  metallic,  at  the  magnet,  3352,  p.  569. 

 ,  the  polarity  o/"  copper,  3352. 

 ,  uon,  3353. 

 ,  bismuth,  3354. 

 ,  hai'd  steel,  3355. 

 ,  a  hard  magnet,  3357. 

Sphondyloid  of  magnetic  force,  3271,  3276. 
St.  Helena  variations,  3045,  3069,  tables. 
St.  Petersburgh  variations,  2915, 2968,  tables, 
3009. 

Standard  of  electricity,  jo.  465. 

Static  condition  of  bodies  generally,  3318. 

Static  and  current  effects,  associated,/).  508. 

Steel  ring  magnet,  3334. 

Steel  magnet  reversed,  3357. 

 not  as  bismuth,  3358,  j9.  569. 

Storms,  magnetic,  2958. 
Sulphate  of  iron,  its  magnetic  relations, 
2546,  2554,  2615. 

Telegraph  wires,  insulated, p)p-  508,  575. 

 in  the  W[,pp.  510,  511,  513,  579. 

 ,  subaqueous,  charged  with  electricity, 

p.  509. 

 ,  ,  their  conduction,  jop.  510,  575. 

 ,  ,  their  induction, ^;jB.  511,  579. 

 ,  subterraneous,  pp.  512,  521,  575. 

 ,  ,  their  charge,  ju.  512. 

 ,  ,  their  lateral  induction,  w«.  513, 

518,  578. 

 ,   ,  their  conduction,  pp.  512,  517, 

578. 

 ,  ,  ,  time  of  the  cun-ent,  pp. 

512,517,  575. 

 ,  ,  , simultaneous  waves,  jy.512. 

Terrestrial  magnetic  action,  '2i.4t7. 

 at  the  equator  and  poles,  2449. 

Terrestrial  magnetic  force,  its  disposition, 

2849. 

 ,  variation  of  direction,  2874. 


588  TND 

Thoughts  on  ray-vibrations,  p.  447. 

Time  in  development  of  magnetism,  2332, 

3319,  jo.  466. 
TVme,  its  influence  in  magnetic  induction, 

2170,  2650,  2688. 

 in  magnetic  rotation  of  light,  p.  466, 

 with  iron  and  bismuth,  3318. 

Toronto  variations,  2905,  2948, 2968,  tables, 

3027. 

Torsion-balance  for  magnetic  observations, 
p.  498. 

Transverse  magnetism,  ^jj.  458,  464. 

Unity  of  natural  forces,  2702. 

Vacuum,  its  magnetic  character,  2770, 2786, 
3277. 


EX. 

Vacuum  ill  water,  2412. 

 ,  the  zero  of  magnetism,/?;;.  465,  488. 

Variation,  annual,  2882,  2947. 

 ,  diurnal,  2892,  2920. 

Velocity  of  electricity  in  wires,  pp.  514,  575. 
 very  Taiiable,  p.  515, 579. 

Wire,  retardation  of  electricity  in,  pp.  514 
575 

Zantedeschi  on  magnetic  motions  of  fla^e, 
p.  490. 

Zero  of  magnetic  action,  2790. 
Zero  of  magnetism,  7?^.  465,  488. 
Zero  of  static  electricity,  p.  465. 


THE  END. 


]°laZe'.  I.  Vol/  -3.  £:cf]  JHesea/'c^yS, 


-L(tt43'39'.35!'jy.    Toronto  Iong'.79°zf.30'!w.- 


) 


ft. 

■i 


I 


Plate  IV.  Vol.  3 .  i'lxp .  Researckes  .  ^  ^  ^.^^ ,  _x . 


i 


i 


